Vol.:(0123456789) 1 3
Ethics and Information Technology (2021) 23:505–525
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-021-09593-z
ORIGINAL PAPER
Artificial Intelligence Regulation: a framework for governance
Patricia Gomes Rêgo de Almeida1,2  · Carlos Denner dos Santos1,3  · Josivania Silva Farias1
Accepted: 7 April 2021 / Published online: 21 April 2021
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2021
Abstract
This article develops a conceptual framework for regulating Artificial Intelligence (AI) that encompasses all stages of modern
public policy-making, from the basics to a sustainable governance. Based on a vast systematic review of the literature on
Artificial Intelligence Regulation (AIR) published between 2010 and 2020, a dispersed body of knowledge loosely centred
around the “framework” concept was organised, described, and pictured for better understanding. The resulting integrative
framework encapsulates 21 prior depictions of the policy-making process, aiming to achieve gold-standard societal values,
such as fairness, freedom and long-term sustainability. This challenge of integrating the AIR literature was matched by the
identification of a structural common ground among different approaches. The AIR framework results from an effort to
identify and later analytically deduce synthetic, and generic tool for a country-specific, stakeholder-aware analysis of AIR
matters. Theories and principles as diverse as Agile and Ethics were combined in the “AIR framework”, which provides a
conceptual lens for societies to think collectively and make informed policy decisions related to what, when, and how the
uses and applications of AI should be regulated. Moreover, the AIR framework serves as a theoretically sound starting point
for endeavours related to AI regulation, from legislation to research and development. As we know, the (potential) impacts
of AI on society are immense, and therefore the discourses, social negotiations, and applications of this technology should
be guided by common grounds based on contemporary governance techniques, and social values legitimated via dialogue
and scientific research.
Keywords Ethics · Artificial Intelligence · Regulation · Governance · Framework
Introduction
The widespread use of AI in our daily actions and in an
unnoticeable fashion (Cerka et al., 2015) has introduced
unprecedented ethical issues to a broad and complex social
system (Cave et al., 2019).
From the same perspective, the complexity of data treatment in the design and development process of a machine
learning solution increases the likelihood of ethical surprises, which demands a wider evaluation of the ethical and
social impacts (Butterworth, 2018).
Based on this reflection, this work has sought to conduct a
vast search for literature that is relevant in terms of Artificial
Intelligence Regulation, processing and grouping it into a
set of purposes presented as frameworks or guidelines for
a framework based on ethical principles. Their main contributions have been customised as a framework based on
the Design and Action Theory (Gregor, 2006) that allows
for reflections and actions aimed at regulating and governing operations and relationships between natural and legal
persons on one side, and AI-embedded systems on the other.
* Patricia Gomes Rêgo de Almeida
patricia.almeida@camara.leg.br
Carlos Denner dos Santos
carlosdenner@unb.br
Josivania Silva Farias
josivania@unb.br
1 University of Brasilia (UnB) – Department
of Administration, Brasília, Brazil
2 Chamber of Deputies of Brazil – Directorate of Innovation
and Information Technology, Brasília, Brazil
3 LATECE, University of Quebec at Montreal (UQAM),
Montreal, Canada
506 P. G. R. de Almeida et al.
1 3
Reasons to regulate AI
Since the term was coined in 1956, Artificial Intelligence has
been associated with a wide range of concepts (Cerka et al.,
2017; Jackson, 2019) based on a thinking human being and
on rational behaviour, which could be synthetised as: systems that think and act like humans and systems that think
and act rationally (Cerka et al., 2015; Russell & Norvig,
1995). Equally wide is the variety of different names associated with whatever utilises AI technology: robots, smart
systems, intelligent systems, intelligent agents, AI agents, AI
algorithms, intelligent algorithms, and autonomous systems,
to mention a few.
For the purpose of avoiding misunderstandings regarding
AI, the High-Level Expert Group established by the European Commission has defined AI systems as “software (and
possibly also hardware) systems designed by humans that,
given a complex goal, act in the physical or digital dimension by perceiving their environment through data acquisition, interpreting the collected structured or unstructured
data, reasoning on the knowledge, or processing the information, derived from this data and deciding the best action(s)
to take to achieve the given goal. AI systems can either use
symbolic rules or learn a numeric model, and they can also
adapt their behaviour by analysing how the environment is
affected by their previous actions.” (AI HLEG, 2019a). Considering the difficulty of defining AI in a way that could fit
all approaches needed for regulation and governance actions
with clear communication among all stakeholders, this article adopts the definition of AI established by the High-Level
Expert Group on AI systems.
The responsibilities, security, intellectual property, and
privacy associated with different systems for medical robots,
drones, autonomous cars, among several "intelligent solutions" offered every day have been questioned.
Illustrating the level of risk-related indeterminacy,
machine learning has been combined with game theory
(Conitzer et al., 2017) in cases where developers were using
game theory to help teach strategic defence to algorithms. A
game between two algorithms predicted that one would kill
the other only in case of an absolute scarcity of resources.
However, when a more intelligent algorithm was introduced,
it immediately killed the weaker ones (Firth-Butterfield,
2017). This case reinforces the idea that an autonomous
system will inevitably find itself in a situation in which it
needs not only to obey a certain rule or not, but also to make
a complex ethical decision (Dennis et al., 2016).
Facing the risks compels us to explore their causes and
effects. Although the effects of AI are not yet known, a large
amount of them can currently be classified. Firstly, those
coming from the undesired effects, such as biases, discrimination, loss of privacy, false positives and false negatives,
loss of autonomy, (psychological, financial, or physical)
damage, loss of control, difficulty identifying liabilities,
losses or decreases in human rights, unemployment, misjudgements, and concentration of power and wealth in a few
companies. Secondly, some risks are the result of intentional
misuses, such as fake news, deep fakes, cyberattacks, terrorism, warfare, weapons, people manipulation, espionage,
low level of democracy (Beltran, 2020; Benjamins & Garcia
2020; Borgesius, 2018; Jackson, 2020; Jobin et al., 2019;
Mika et al., 2019).
Considering all those risks, establishing best practices for
delegating and defining new moral responsibility attribution
models is crucial to leverage the opportunities created by
AI (Taddeo & Floridi, 2018). Risk assessment models can
provide support and flexibility for Big Data and AI applications (Mantelero, 2018), and stakeholders who develop and
deploy AI-based systems must enhance their knowledge of
the values protected by human rights and how those rights
apply to their own actions (Smuha, 2020).
Despite being a huge challenge, finding a way to deal
with ethical issues must be a constant target of research, for
what we need to join all our forces (Bostrom, 2014), and AI
regulation is on the right path to get there (Carter, 2020).
The reasons to regulate include: manufacturers’ need to
comprehend a legal framework within which they can operate reliably; consumers’ and society’s need to be protected
from devices that may harm or adversely affect them; and
the need for business opportunities (Holder et al., 2016a).
In industries still lacking regulation, the general approach
observed is that innovation is freely allowed, but those in
charge should bear the consequences in case certain types
of damage are caused (Reed, 2018).
Faced with the challenge of minimising those risks, a
combination of strategy and actions must be put to practice
during the entire lifecycle of AI systems, in order not only
to identify damages and responsibilities, but also, and especially, to avoid them.
Seeking the best way to regulate
Sometimes, when used to denote an attempt to standardise behavioural patterns, the term “regulation” assumes the
meaning of a law (Hildebrandt, 2018).
However, on a broader approach, regulation is a sustained attempt to modify behaviours of others according to
defined standards or purposes in order to produce the desired
outcomes. This can involve standard-setting, informationgathering, and behaviour modification mechanisms (Black,
2002), especially in cases evolving ethical issues, whose
understanding is complex when applied to a real world.
Therefore, law is just one way of regulating society, while
Artificial Intelligence Regulation: a framework for governance 507
1 3
other alternatives to regulate human behaviour may also be
widely used (Hildebrandt, 2018).
Disruptive innovation always challenges regulatory
strategies due to the reactive nature of traditional regulation
(Kaal & Vermeulen, 2017). In the case of innovation by
AI, the challenge is amplified, since it is strongly related to
ethical issues and its results could be unpredictable in some
situations, bringing about unforeseen social impacts. In addition, if AI adoption and implementation are conducted in a
reckless manner, social and political instability could ensue,
thus threatening freedom, self-determination, human rights,
and fundamental values (Caron & Gupta, 2020). As human
behaviour encompasses decisions from an ethical perspective, the regulation should also consider it. While norms
as instruments of regulation relate to what is good or bad
from society’s point of view, ethics concerns itself with the
nature of the principles upon which those norms are founded
(Pedro, 2014).
A few laws have been resorted to in an attempt to settle
damages caused by AI-supported products and services judicially. If, on the one hand, the number of cases is multiplying, on the other, the legislative branch seems to be moving
at a negligible speed compared to the technological advancements enforcing the perception that traditional regulation
does not fit in this challenge (Cerka et al., 2015; Larsson,
2020; Villaronga & Heldeweg, 2018). Part of this increasing
gap between laws and technology is caused by the lack of
a thorough and accurate definition of AI (Firth-Butterfield,
2017; Larsson, 2020), which is aggravated by the fact that
the definition changes as the technology evolves (Fjeld et al.,
2020). Considering this issue, the concept of dynamic regulation could fit in the field of AI, as it is based on learning
by doing and continuity of regulatory relationships (Kaal &
Vermeulen, 2017; Lewis & Yildirim, 2002).
A yet-to-be-solved equation is the breadth of laws dealing with globally produced and commercialised technologies (Holder et al., 2016a) and robot-generated inventions
(Holder et al., 2016b). The problem reaches even broader
dimensions when one considers the complex networks
established in the technology industry, making it possible
for products to be subjected to learning from data scattered
across the world (Lenardon, 2017).
Large-scale data analyses have revealed that the key challenge related to the AI regulation dilemma is demonstrating it is produced and deployed appropriately (Butterworth,
2018). One of the most advocated strategies is transparency,
an opening of the entire production process, especially the
decision-making rules, the method, and the data utilised
when training the intelligent system (Buiten, 2019; Butterworth, 2018; Tutt, 2017). However, on certain occasions,
even in case the AI algorithm is open, full transparency
cannot be ensured, as there is a difference between seeing
the whole code and understanding all of its potential effects
(Firth-Butterfield, 2017). A similar strategy to open data is
the Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) standard for
the creation of coding models oriented towards a global
comprehension (Adadi & Berrada, 2018; Taddeo & Floridi,
2018). In addition to the concerns related to the development process of an AI system, data governance has been
recognised as being key to AI governance (Hilb, 2020; UK
Government, 2018).
Some of the AI regulation theories that have been proposed are based on contractual and extracontractual liability,
or on strict liability, and adopt a liability model in which the
moral responsibility is distributed among designers, regulators, and users. The attempt to hold robots accountable for
their actions has led a few countries to consider the possibility of granting a legal identity to each unit. One could
argue that if parties in a contractual relationship may be
legally represented by another entity, then so can systems
(Cerka et al., 2017). As a counterargument, the term “robot
liability” should be replaced with “indirect liability over the
robot”, given the impossibility of claiming damages from
a robot, i.e., it cannot be held criminally liable. Thus, the
impact of such products on society should also be a liability (Jackson, 2019; Nevejans, 2016). Although this latter
understanding tends to be more acceptable from a global
perspective, a liability model is still an essential and complex variable to be defined through an AI regulation strategy.
Also among the concerns that motivate AI regulation is
the approach aimed at minimising the disruption of the work
model with the goal of fighting job loss (Wright & Schultz,
2018).
Drawing attention to the domain of what is to be regulated, attempts to legislate digital technologies without
proper knowledge for doing so have been criticised (Reed,
2018). With the intention of minimising those risks, a gradual regulation strategy (Villaronga & Heldeweg, 2018) can
be used. When mitigating risks, regulatory agencies could
bar the introduction of certain algorithms into the market
until their safety and efficacy have been proven by means of
tests (Tutt, 2017) founded on ethics (Arkin, 2011).
In 2017, the European Parliament Committee on Legal
Affairs released a report recommending the creation of a
European agency for robotics and AI, suggesting a combination of both hard and soft laws, given the complexity
associated with the evolution of the regulatory model. It
would put regulators and external experts together to monitor AI trends and study standards for best practices (Cath
et al., 2017; Nevejans, 2016). After approving the study of
the High-Level Expert Group on AI, the European Commission recommended upgrading the European Framework to
one especially designed for AI Governance (European Commission, 2019). In the same direction, the House of Lords
(2018) has recommended the creation of an AI regulatory
framework.
508 P. G. R. de Almeida et al.
1 3
Another effort observed in the US has resulted in S.3891,
which defines conditions for advancing Artificial Intelligence research, including the development of technical
standards (US Congress, 2020), and in H.Res. 153, which
aims to support the development of guidelines for the ethical
dsevelopment of Artificial Intelligence (US Congress, 2019).
In a parallel effort, many self-regulatory private-sector
initiatives have been created, and research has been carried
out to discuss ethical issues on AI development and use,
such as the Partnership on AI to Benefit People and Society (AI4People, 2018; Partnership on AI, 2016; The Future
of Life Institute, 2019b), The Montreal Declaration for a
Responsible Development of Artificial Intelligence (University of Montreal, 2018), and The Toronto Declaration
(Toronto, 2020).
At the government level, ethical principles were considered when the national AI-oriented strategies of a few
countries were drawn up, as happened in Japan (Japanese
Cabinet Office, 2019), France (French PM, 2018), Germany
(German Federal Government, 2018), United Arab Emirates
(Dubai, 2019), India (Aayog, 2018), and Singapore (Monetary Authority of Singapore, 2019). Additionally, several
countries have shown their intention to create policies and
laws to regulate the development and use of AI (Future of
Life Institute, 2019a). Similar concerns have served as the
basis for recommendations regarding ethical principles by
a few transnational organisations, such as the Council of
Europe (2018) and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (2019).
As the major concern regarding both self-regulation and
government initiatives kickstarted the debate on AI governance through ethical principles, a set of core topics was comprised in each one of them: privacy, accountability, safety
and security, transparency and explainability, fairness and
non-discrimination, human control of technology, professional responsibility, and promotion of human values. However, different principles can be observed under the same
topic, which illustrates the lack of unanimity (Fjeld et al.,
2020).
Standardisation documents are also part of the efforts
associated with the AI regulation challenge. A good example
is the ad hoc technical committee on Artificial Intelligence
established within the International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO), whose plan includes two dozen standards
on AI and Big Data (Neznamov, 2020).
The huge gap between ethical guidelines and laws, apart
from the great number of potential situations in which stakeholders (developers, deployers, etc.) fail to apply such ethical
principles, draws attention to the need to shift from principles to processes when it comes to AI governance (Larsson,
2020). Thus, there is a long path to be paved through a connected network of processes including several stakeholders
in a way to keep on pace with the society’s values.
Method
With the goal of surveying the relevant scientific literature
on AI regulation, we have systematically searched for and
organised papers to summarise the corpus and perform a
qualitative analysis to understand the evolution and current
state of the science.
We have compiled papers published between 2010 and
2020 containing the following expressions: ("ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE" and "ETHICAL USE"), ("ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE" and "REGULATION"), or ("ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE" and "GOVERNANCE"). This
search then resulted in title and subject matches on the
ScienceDirect, JSTOR, SpringerLink, PROQUEST, IEEE,
Scopus, DOAJ, and Google Scholar databases. Only peerreviewed research articles in English have been compiled.
The selection of papers was later refined by reading all
abstracts with the goal of removing case-specific discussions, as well as those in which regulation was not the main
topic under debate. In addition, new papers on AI-related
laws and government strategies that presented arguments
on ethical principles have also been included in the sample.
This final corpus of literature has been classified according to specific parameters: year of publication, journal,
author, author’s institution, author’s field of study, country,
keywords. Summaries of each paper have also been developed to include: concepts, findings, contributions, agenda,
approach, method, and researched subject. The following
terms were considered when classifying the articles: “ethics/
ethical principles”, “how to regulate/existing regulation”,
“government strategies”, and “framework or guidelines similar to a framework”. After analysing the abstracts, a sample
comprising 109 documents was selected for further reading
and inclusion.
Results
In chronological terms, it is worth highlighting that 88.1%
of the papers were published after 2015, with a growing
production every year following that.
The sample reflects the evolution in the fields of research
that take an interest in AI regulation, which is desired
(Floridi et al., 2020). Although Artificial Intelligence as a
subject of study traditionally pertains to Information Technology (Computer Science and Engineering), there has been
a growing interest in its regulation by other areas, such as
Law, Business Administration, and Philosophy. Out of the
entire sample, researchers from the field of IT (combined
or not with other fields) represent 47.7% and researchers
exclusively from IT represent 27.5%, whereas researchers
from other fields (excluding IT) represent 52.3%. In some
Artificial Intelligence Regulation: a framework for governance 509
1 3
cases, the same article is co-authored by researchers from
different areas (22%).
Special heed has been paid to the analysis of the main
object of the sample, non-exclusively divided into: “ethics
and ethical principles” (45.9%), “how to regulate and existing regulation” (47.7%), “government strategies” (9.2%) and
“framework or guidelines similar to a framework” (19.3%).
It is worth noting that discussions on how to regulate only
became significant in 2016. Concerning the discussions on
AI regulatory frameworks, AI guidelines based on ethical
principles with orientations similar to a framework have also
been considered when they go beyond a description of ethical principles and actually provide orientations concerning
how to apply those principles. From that perspective, 21
unique models have been found, which will be presented
and analysed below.
Model for ethical issues in experimental
technologies (Amigoni & Schiaffonati, 2018)
Based on the premise that a robot is an experimental technology, this model intends to minimise the ethical dilemmas associated with decisions made by autonomous systems
(Poel, 2016). The proposal supports decision-making processes based on 16 conditions for deploying experimental
technologies built to anticipate potential ethical issues as
robots interact with people and the environment. Split into
three groups, the conditions are aimed at: preventing damages (non-maleficence conditions: means for gaining knowledge of risks and benefits, monitoring of data and risks,
possibility and willingness to adapt or terminate the experiment, risk mitigation, consciously scaling up, flexible setup,
and avoidance of locking-in and undermining resilience);
good-doing (beneficence conditions: expectation of social
benefits, clear distribution of responsibilities); and respect
for autonomy and justice (experimental subjects informed,
approval by democratically legitimised bodies, possibility of
experimental subjects influencing the project, possibility of
withdrawing subjects from the experiment, special treatment
given to vulnerable experimental subjects, fair distribution
of potential hazards and benefits, reversibility of compensation of harm).
The model is an approach to regulation through a development process that would be part of a gradual interactive
strategy set forth during the design stage. One can find
among the outputs the epistemological role of exploratory
experiments, while acquiring the knowledge of how robots
behave in a real-world scenario. The authors highlight the
prediction of “red button” conditions for situations in which
the risk of harming people cannot be securely avoided during the experiment.
The 16 conditions proposed by Amigoni and Schiaffonati’s “Ethical Framework for Robot Systems” seem to
fit perfectly in standardised processes built by regulatory
agencies as they test all the technologies submitted by the
industry and service providers. The proposal can also be
incorporated through risk analyses conducted by scholars
for society as a whole.
Interactive regulatory governance model
(Villaronga & Heldeweg, 2018)
Considering that regulatory actions cannot keep up with
the speed of technology, and that top-down regulation
approaches require mature laws, the authors have identified the need for a hybrid approach to start regulating AI
technologies. They argue that bottom-up mechanisms can
help develop the legislation and produce knowledge of AI
development processes.
Focusing on a balance between regulation/legislationin-progress and technology-in-progress, the proposal is
based on an interactive governance model for technological
development and law formulation processes in which the
attributions of stakeholders are highlighted through process
descriptions. The need for continuous learning and a gradual evolution of the legal framework is noteworthy, using
such expressions as “Regulatory Innovation” and “Temporary Experimental Legislation”, and considering the proper
sequence of actions among agents at the maturity stage of
an innovation’s lifecycle.
The proposed model includes components such as:
• A Regulatory-to-Technology (R2T) macro-process to
guide the creation of a new conceptual model for robots
in accordance with the existing legislation, considering
how it affects the way intelligent systems are built and
used. It enables the creation of an AI technology impact
assessment encompassing ethical, legal, and societal consequences. It focuses on legal opportunities or constraints
that could have an impact on a new or existing robot. The
result of the analysis considers a range of alternatives,
from “abort development”, “adjust plans”, “go-ahead and
lobby for legal change”, or “take risks”.
• A Technology-to-Regulatory (T2R) macro-process to
adjust the law to the needs that result from the evolution of technology or the relationship between intelligent
systems and society. It allows for the implementation of
a regulatory impact assessment.
• A Governance Committee to rule on the reports related to
the impact of both R2T (ex-ante robot) and T2R (ex-post
robot) processes.
510 P. G. R. de Almeida et al.
1 3
• A data repository shared by R2T and T2R in order to
gather data about whether each AI technology (planned
or in use) is in compliance with the law.
Among the main benefits of this hybrid AI Governance Model, it is worth highlighting the integration of topdown and bottom-up regulatory actions in an incremental
strategy, thus minimising the risk posed when regulating
a new, constantly changing object.
The proposed Interactive Regulatory Governance
Model helps to raise awareness regarding the lack of a
continuous resource to connect both worlds—technology
and legislation—while being iteratively developed and
improved. Since the legislative branch is in charge of the
legislation (in most democratic countries), it can be associated with the R-side of processes. When looking for the
most ideal entity to act as the T-side of processes, the tasks
of a regulatory agency can be identified.
Connecting both sides, R2T and T2R processes would
be a strategy to establish a closer relationship between the
legislative branch and the regulatory agency.
Ethics model for AI development and deployment
(Schrader & Ghosh, 2018)
Founded upon philosophical principles and the dimensions
associated with safeguarding human rights and well-being,
the proposed ethical framework for AI development and
deployment has been designed to implement core functions to represent ethical activities and the outcomes from
both the philosophical and ethical perspectives.
The ethical perspectives are split into six categories:
Rights (deontological ethics); Damages and Goods (teleological ethics); Virtue (aretaic ethics); Community (community ethics); Dialogue (communication ethics); and
Flourishing (flourishing ethics).
The recommended core functions to be considered
when developing AI systems are:
• Identifying ethical issues of AI—fairness, transparency,
equity, goodness, beneficence, social utility, happiness,
and protection of humans.
• Raising human awareness of AI—a clear understanding
of how AI systems work within each product and how
the industry develops algorithms.
• Collaborating with AI—dialogical interaction, listening, and understanding between humans and AI.
• Accountability of AI—guaranteeing the ethical compliance of AI systems and their designers.
• Integrity of AI—maintaining the AI system limited to
the purpose for which the technology was intended.
A matrix combining the five core functions with the six
perspectives has been built as a guideline to be followed
during the AI project. As a proactive action in the design,
development, and use of products and services that utilise
AI, the model seeks to reflect the nature of social changes
demanded by a new ethical thought.
Although they do not associate the framework with any
specific organisation or institution, the authors’ contribution can be applied by a regulatory agency when auditing
the industry, as well as in its internal processes, to better
understand the impacts technology has on the stakeholders.
Competency‑based AI regulation model (Scherer,
2016)
Considering the competencies, strengths, and weaknesses of
each state power, the proposal of an AI Regulatory Model
(AIDA—Artificial Intelligence Development Act) is based
on the distribution of responsibilities without losing sight
of the mission goals. The model acknowledges the regulatory role of the executive, legislative, and judicial powers as
agents in the regulatory process.
In the proposed model, the legislative branch would provide a statute placing a regulatory agency in charge of certifying AI products and services with regard to user and social
safety. In general, legislators have limited knowledge of AI
systems, their only support being a few committee meetings with experts. In order to solve this problem, legislators
would delegate the responsibility for policy-making to the
regulatory agency.
Supported by groups of researchers, the regulatory
agency would comprise two main areas: policy-making and
certification. Such an agency would be expected to be more
agile and competent to monitor the evolution of technology, identify risks in the intelligent learning process and
use of AI, issue technical recommendations, and verify that
the technology is being applied for its intended purposes. A
certificate would be given to designers, manufacturers, and
service providers after being approved through the agency’s
processes. Pre-certification rules would also be made public
to the industry and service providers. In case of an accident
with certified products, the agency would publish a report to
society, explaining the circumstances behind its occurrence
and which certification rules/processes would therefore be
modified.
Due to their ex-post nature, courts would judge cases
considering whether or not a certification exists. Courts
would judge companies for any losses and damages
caused, considering the situation in which those organisations find themselves when it comes to certification. If a
company’s products or services cause any damages, if certified, the company would be judged based on more lenient
Artificial Intelligence Regulation: a framework for governance 511
1 3
rules, whereas uncertified companies would be subjected
to more rigid norms.
The proposed model takes into consideration the natural
attributions of each entity within the government. Agility
is required for the actions performed by the regulatory
agencies, which would give them a prominent role in the
regulation process. This is key to enable the evolution of
technology while the legislation takes its time to mature.
Regulation model sustained by society (Rahwan,
2017)
Inspired by the Social Contract Theory (Rousseau, 2016),
the Regulatory Model Sustained by Society adjusts the
“human-in-the-loop (HITL)” to the “society-in-the-loop
(SITL)” model.
The use of HITL thinking in AI has been largely applied
to help an algorithm learn from humans’ contributions.
The agility and effectiveness of a HITL interactive learning machine stem from user feedback, thus enriching the
knowledge that gets generated.
From a regulation perspective, the author argues that
it is not sufficient to only adjust HITL to use a human to
monitor an AI system and correct it in case of misbehaviour. By doing so, the regulation would rely on the judgment of an individual or group of individuals that subject
the whole process to a narrow analysis. If we want to deal
with a system that has an impact on the values of an entire
society, that society must be included in the analysis, giving it a broader approach. It would not only avoid biased
judgments, but also balance the competing interests of different stakeholders.
It is suggested that SITL be used in a process characterised by human-based government and citizen channels. On
one side, the government’s AI products and services would
be run and, on the other side, citizens would evaluate those
smart systems based on their own values. This would allow
the government to understand how social behaviour and values change. Therefore, society-in-the-loop would become
a governance tool for society to control and proactively
identify those elements. Conflicts among safety-, privacy-,
and justice-related concepts would benefit from this model.
This relationship can be summed up as: society-in-theloop=human-in-the-loop+social contract. The model also
recommends auditing mechanisms to tackle the possibility
of fake data manipulated by social groups at the learning
stage, as well as results that would affect regulations.
For the purpose of using the proposed model as part of
a broader AI governance model, both society and academia
can be considered in terms of society’s role when answering an agency’s inquiry regarding the ethical behaviour of
AI systems.
Principles of robotics (Boden et al., 2017)
After pinpointing the responsibilities of all agents involved
in robotics, five principles were established in a guideline
for robot designers, manufacturers, and users. The main goal
of the rules is to emphasise that robots are tools, whereas
humans are the actual responsible agents. The proposed
rules are:
a. Robots should not be designed as weapons, except in the
interests of national security.
b. Robots should be designed and operated to comply with
existing laws, including those dealing with privacy.
c. Robots should be designed to be safe and secure.
d. Robots should not be used to exploit vulnerable users by
pretending to feel emotions.
e. It should be possible to find out who is responsible for
any particular robot.
Aiming to encourage responsibility within the robotrelated research and the industrial community, seven messages have been created to highlight the responsible innovation spirit needed to abide by the rules.
The opportunity to use this proposal in audits performed
by regulatory agencies can be identified, and that need must
be reflected in the legislation to be adapted or created.
Agile AI governance (Wallach & Marchant, 2018)
Aware of the concerns regarding AI impacts exceeding the
regulatory scope, capabilities, and jurisdiction of an agency
or nation, the authors propose a model to address this governance challenge.
The model predicts actions performed by a Governance
Coordinating Committee at the national level and a Global
Governance Coordinating Committee. The main goal is a
soft-law strategy that mitigates risks while the legislation is
being drawn up. The soft governance part involves industry
standards, social codes, labs, certification practices, procedures, and programmes. The hard governance part concentrates on laws, regulations, and regulatory groups.
A national committee would coordinate the efforts of a
governance process encompassing stakeholders to produce
recommendations, reports, and roadmaps, while monitoring
those actions at the same time. This national forum would
also be a perfect structure to enforce soft governance mechanisms as a necessary complement to the hard ones.
On the international level, a global committee would
not only coordinate agreements among countries, but also
establish a common understanding of which international
standards should be used as a soft governance strategy. The
international approach is also advocated to bring some balance to the several countries that are not yet participating
512 P. G. R. de Almeida et al.
1 3
in the AI regulation dynamics, considering that the current
situation makes them more vulnerable.
The proposed model takes a relationship network into
account to address AI in a way that bolsters the formulation
of actual standards while the legislation matures. The agile
meaning of this governance is its incremental approach,
which allows for continuous inputs. This would be an alternative to the problem posed by the temporal mismatch
between formal regulatory actions and the production and
commercialisation of deep machine learning-based products
and services around the world. The success of this proposal
depends on the amount of effort put into it by the market,
academia, government, insurance companies, and organised
civil society.
Sustainable AI development (Djeffal, 2018)
Considering the closer connection between sustainable
development and governance, the author highlights that governance mechanisms are built to be continuously improved.
The proposal concerns the entire lifecycle of an AI-based
solution as the main foundation of a Sustainable AI Development (SAID) framework.
Analysed under the lens of a governance structure, SAID
is stratified into the following layers: Technological, Social,
and Governance.
At the base, the technology layer is in charge of specific
applications involving architecture, data, and algorithm
design.
Focusing on the impacts systems have on society, the
social layer deals with the process of inserting technology
into real life. It encompasses an analysis of the potential
consequences of using AI in the social sphere.
Highlighting the importance of a broad treatment, the
governance layer looks at the way algorithms influence both
national and international decisions.
SAID gathers the different approaches examined in the
various frameworks and somehow materialises the perception that, in order to be effective, AI regulation demands
actions by IT and Social Sciences (Law, Business Administration, Philosophy, and Psychology) professionals alike.
It also reminds us that, due to the topic’s complexity, an AI
governance model must include different process tiers.
Ethical framework for automation using robotics
(Wright & Schultz, 2018)
Concerned with the integration between several stakeholders and automation using AI, this framework integrates the
Stakeholders Theory with the Social Contract Theory in an
attempt to find ethical grounds for developing, providing,
and utilising AI.
The proposal considers as stakeholders: workers, the
market, governments, the economy, and society in general.
The impacts on the job market, from an ethical perspective,
and the relationships among those stakeholders are highly
emphasised.
The framework is based on a set of steps ranging from
the identification of stakeholders, analysis of the social contracts among them, an assessment of how stakeholders are
impacted, and lastly, actions aimed at mitigating the risk of
terminating or breaching work contracts. An important target
to be reached is increasing the benefits for stakeholders.
It is worth noting that this proposal considers as stakeholders those workers whose jobs or occupations will be
modified with the introduction of AI into products and services. Due to the complexity of interests among stakeholders
and all the labour concerns, the framework fits in the government policy-making process. The impact of such public
policies on the country’s economy may result in the need for
laws, which means the legislative branch must be included
as a stakeholder.
Intelligent model to regulate learning algorithms
(Buiten, 2019)
Focused on a strategy to fight intelligent services that contain biases, this model postulates that an algorithm should
assess the essential elements of a machine learning process
(data, testing algorithms, and decision models). The proposal is founded on the thesis that the transparency of a code
is insufficient to guarantee an unbiased solution and admits
that it is still possible to find biases, even when learning
from vast amounts of data.
In the data domain, all data samples are assumed to
include some built-in biases that need to be considered. The
data must be checked to ensure their validity, reliability, and
proper data dependency.
Regarding the testing algorithms, the model recommends
using a variety of algorithms and comparing their performance. However, that must be done only after discovering
the quality of the available data.
The decision-making process is seen as a delicate phase in
which developers must be aware of the correlations between
variables, because hidden relationships may obscure a biased
orientation. It also acknowledges the difficulty of identifying those problems automatically as algorithms grow in
complexity.
Universal declaration of human rights
as a framework (Donahoe & Metzger, 2019)
This model is founded on the argument that the several
different frameworks related to each specific area of ethics
are insufficient to regulate AI on an international scale,
Artificial Intelligence Regulation: a framework for governance 513
1 3
both in the private sector and within the government. Due
to that gap, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
(Kunz, 1949) has been considered a mature approach that
different cultures have been adopting for decades. Modern
adjustments were made by the UN Human Rights Council
in 2011, published as the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights (United Nations, 2011), which
highlight the roles and responsibilities of private-sector
businesses in the protection of human rights.
Under the human rights framework, governments have
the duty to protect citizens from violations and infringements of their rights by other governments and nonState actors, including the private sector. Donahoe and
Metzger’s proposal deals with the centrality of the human
person as the focal point of governance and society. It
seeks to address the potential impacts of AI, such as:
• The right to equal protection and non-discrimination—
avoiding biases in the data and ensuring fairness in
machine-based decisions.
• The right to life and personal security—concerning
autonomous weapons that move beyond human control.
• The right to an effective remedy for violations and
infringements of rights—transparency, fairness, and
accountability in cases where AI systems impact people’s rights.
• The right to privacy—addressing the loss of privacy in
data-driven societies and the need to protect personally
identifiable data.
• The rights to work and to enjoy an adequate standard
of living—guiding governance decisions around the
displacement of human workers by AI.
Software requirement model for the ethical
assessment of robots (Millar, 2016)
Considering ethics as a social enterprise, the proposal puts
forth a set of general specifications to be considered in a
system aimed at assessing robots during their construction.
To that effect, five major rules have been built:
• Balancing designer and user requirements, considering
the potential damages.
• Utilising a user-centred ethical evaluation tool for AI
systems, which must use design methodologies that are
able to identify the impacts on human values in use
contexts.
• Including the psychology of user-robot relationship variables in the ethical evaluation tool to identify variables
such as the user’s emotional state.
• Compliance with the Human-Robotics Interaction Code
of Ethics (Riek & Howard, 2014).
• Designers’ understanding of both acceptable and unacceptable design features, which could be implemented by
including ethicists in design teams.
It seems the proposal may be utilised by the industry and
regulatory agencies alike. In both cases, it could be the first
red flag signalling the need for a red button in robot projects
(Arnold & Scheutz, 2018).
Ethical judgement model for codes (Bonnemains
et al., 2018)
Considering that (a) an ethical framework allows us to
deal with situations involving ethical dilemmas, (b) one
framework alone is not efficient enough to compute an
ethical decision, and (c) tackling ethical decisions is better
than avoiding them, the author proposes a formal logical
model that can be implemented by an agent facing an ethical dilemma, with the ability to both make decisions and
explain those decisions. It assumes that formal expression
analyses are especially useful to identify the subjectivity of
a decision.
Different judgements on possible decisions have been
studied according to three ethical frameworks: consequentialist ethics, deontological ethics, and the Doctrine of Double Effect. In the path toward a refined and final framework,
various ethical dilemmas have been formalised in judgment
functions that return three possible results: acceptable (┬),
unacceptable (┴), or undetermined (?). The concepts of
‘decision’, ‘event’, and ‘effect’ were taken into account when
building the model’s functionalities.
Those analyses can be appreciated when we judge someone or something based on particular moral theories.
Asilomar AI principles (Future of Life Institute,
2019b)
The governance model proposed by the Asilomar Conference resulted in 23 AI Principles undersigned by thousands of experts (Kozuka, 2019). Grouped under “Research
Issues”, “Ethics and Values”, and “Longer-Term Issues”,
those principles encompass the lifecycle of an AI-embedded product or service—from motivation and funding to the
assessment of benefits and judgement criteria concerning
its impacts.
In the Research Issues dimension, the recommendations
are to: research goals and funding, establish a connection
between researchers and policymakers, research the culture
of cooperation, and promote synergy to avoid corner-cutting
when devising safety standards.
In the Ethics and Values dimensions, the orientations
are to: maintain AI systems secure during their entire lifecycle, make them transparent in case of failure as well as
514 P. G. R. de Almeida et al.
1 3
in judgment results, consider designers and builders of
advanced AI systems as stakeholders in the responsibility
chain, align AI systems’ values with their users’, design AI
systems to be compatible with human rights and cultural
diversity, preserve personal privacy, share their benefits as
much as possible, and make it possible for a human to take
control of AI systems, if so desired.
Finally, in the Longer-Term Issues sphere, the principles
are to: be cautious when making decisions without a consensus, build a mitigation plan to deal with the risks, plan a
recursive type of self-improvement, and develop AI systems
based only on widely shared ethical ideals.
European ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI (AI
HLEG 2019b)
With the goal of creating guidelines to orient a new AI governance, a team of experts entitled High-Level Expert Group
on Artificial Intelligence has drawn up the Ethics Guidelines
for a Trustworthy AI for the European Commission based
on a structure supported by values that should be considered throughout the system’s lifecycle: lawful, ethical, and
robust AI.
Based on the European Union Charter of Fundamental
Rights (EU Parliament, 2012), the model establishes trustworthy AI as a key element for a governance framework
(Kozuka, 2019) has been built using a three-tier structure.
The highest tier addresses ethical principles based on fundamental human rights: respect for human autonomy, prevention of damages, fairness, and explicability. To ensure
fairness in a society with different interests and objectives,
it defends an explicable decision-making process. It should
consider traceability, auditability, and transparent communications regarding system capabilities. It also recommends
that particular attention be paid to vulnerable groups and situations characterised by asymmetries of power or information (employers and workers, or businesses and consumers).
The second tier includes the key requirements necessary
for implementing an AI-based system or service throughout
its lifecycle: human agency and oversight; technical robustness and safety; privacy and data governance; transparency;
diversity, non-discrimination and fairness; social and environmental wellbeing; and accountability. All requirements
are connected to one another through a full-mesh relationship where each one of them has the same weight.
Special attention is suggested to the oversight as part
of a governance mechanism that could use human-in-theloop (HITL), human-on-the-loop (HOTL), or human-incommand (HIC). A strong connection can also be found
between “privacy and data governance” and “diversity, nondiscrimination, and fairness”, due to the need for mechanisms to avoid inadvertent historical biases, incompleteness, and inadequate data governance models. Regarding
the accountability concerns, a recommendation is given
to carry out an impact assessment prior to and during the
development.
Defending a trustworthy AI implementation throughout
the lifecycle of an AI system, the model demands a processoriented approach that encompasses both technical and nontechnical methods when implementing the requirements.
Within the non-technical approach, one can find legislation
and corporate guidelines encompassing codes of conduct,
policies, performance indicators, and agreed-upon standards.
Those standards consider AI users, consumers, organisations, research institutions, and governments as stakeholders. They also include a certification granted to organisations
that produce transparent, accountable, and fair AI systems
in accordance with the established standards. The entity in
charge of the certification could play an important role in
the communications with “industry and/or public oversight
groups, sharing best practices, discussing dilemmas, or
reporting emerging issues of ethical concerns.”
For the base tier, a list of recommendations directed at the
operationalisation of the key requirements in the upper tier
for each specific system has been formulated.
Ethically aligned design (IEEE 2019)
The IEEE Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and
Intelligent Systems has proposed five general principles for
AI systems and a guideline recommending actions to establish ethical and social implementations for intelligent and
autonomous systems that prioritise human wellbeing.
According to that model, the ethical design, development,
and implementation of AI systems should consider the following principles: human rights, wellbeing, accountability,
transparency, and awareness of misuse.
Focusing on personal data rights, the wellbeing promoted by the effects on the economy, the legal frameworks
for accountability and transparency, and the education and
awareness policies, recommendations were made to a wide
set of stakeholders.
To governments: the governance framework should
include standards and regulatory agencies, provide society
with ethics education and security awareness regarding the
potential risks, improve digital literacy, use multiple metrics
as wellbeing indicators, and implement a wellbeing impact
assessment.
To industries: programmatic levels of accountability
should be provided to address culpability in legal matters,
transparency by design, intelligibility of a system’s operation and decisions, damage mitigation strategies, assessment
starting at the design phase, understanding how each jurisdiction would treat the damage caused by a given AI system.
To the legislative sphere: responsibility, culpability, liability, and accountability issues should be classified.
Artificial Intelligence Regulation: a framework for governance 515
1 3
General recommendations: certification of AI systems,
identification and prioritisation of standards for each category of AI systems, continuously updating the standards,
metrics utilised to assess AI systems, agreements on moral
decisions, evaluation by third parties, applying the classical
methodologies of deontological and teleological ethics to
machine learning, adherence to the code of conduct by the
AI production team, and bridging the language gap between
technologists, philosophers, and policymakers.
At the international level: establishing a global multistakeholder dialogue to determine the best practices, facilitating AI research and development in developing nations,
and using indicators to assess AI-related technological interventions in those countries.
Government and industries: identifying the types of decisions and operations that should never be delegated to AI
systems.
A special guideline for implementing an ethical culture in
organisations (IEEE, 2020) has also been built, encompassing a strategy to assess the level of each dimension to be
developed (lagging, basic, advanced, and leading).
Avoiding biases and discrimination (Lin et al., 2020)
In order to amplify the effectiveness of bias-reduction intervention procedures in cases of implicit biases, the framework explores an innovative AI-assisted intervention based
on a bidimensional approach.
In the first dimension, the different types of information
AI provide to users are captured: the current state of affairs
(descriptive information), the likelihood of future states
(predictive information), and the expected utility of an action
(prescriptive information). It considers that all interventions
are prescriptive, and the knowledge-based systems (KBS)
will decide to intervene depending on how they simulate
the results.
In the second dimension, an AI system can intervene in
different phases of the decision-making process (input-based
interventions, output-based interventions, and cognitionbased interventions) as part of an interactive process.
It is a case of regulation by software, which could be
used by the industry and service providers as part of their
internal process.
Standardisation exchange model (Lewis et al., 2020)
Considering the importance of standardisation in a regulation strategy, the model proposes a process among functional
entities in the AI value chain through which information
related to standards is exchanged among them.
Classified by their functional roles, the actors—data
providers, AI system creator, AI system operator, AI user,
oversight authority, and associate stakeholder—change
standards focusing on a trustworthy AI.
The benefits of each exchange are presented, as well as
the potential topics for new standardisations. Most of them
concern issues to be considered in an AI product certification process.
Although the focus is on the industry, the model considers the importance of the government in the whole process
and the need for an international community to discuss the
standards.
Algorithmic impact assessment (Canadian
Government 2020)
Aiming to help public and private-sector companies assess
and mitigate the impacts of deploying an automated decision-making system, the Canadian Government has developed the Algorithmic Impact Assessment (AIA) based on
the Government Directive on Automated Decision-Making.
The AIA questionnaire considers the reasons for using AI
on decision-making processes, the capabilities encompassed
by the system, algorithm transparency and explainability,
system category (health, social assistance, economic, etc.),
development and training process, system and data architecture, stakeholders, and risk mitigation measures.
The impact assessment addresses the four levels according to how the decisions impact the rights, health, or wellbeing, the economic interests of individuals or communities, and the ongoing sustainability of an ecosystem. Thus,
levels I, II, III, and IV are each related to a certain impact,
namely, reversible brief, reversible in the short term, difficult
to reverse, and irreversible.
The Directive on Automated Decision-Making was
designed by the Canadian Government to make its administrative decisions compatible with core administrative law
principles, such as transparency, accountability, legality, and
procedural fairness.
The requirements considered by the Directive on Automated Decision-Making are distributed between two pillars:
transparency and quality assurance. Among the transparency
requirements, it establishes that:
• Notice on relevant websites must be issued before decisions are made,
• Meaningful explanations must be provided to affected
individuals regarding the decisions made,
• The Government of Canada has the right to access all
components of the system.
Among the quality assurance requirements, there are
rules to ensure testing and monitoring outcomes, data quality, peer review, employee training, contingency, security,
compliance with the law, and human intervention.
516 P. G. R. de Almeida et al.
1 3
AI governance by human rights‑centred design,
deliberation and oversight (Yeung et al., 2019)
Considering international human rights-based standards as
the most promising governance framework to deal with ethical standards, Yeung et al. (2019) have proposed the Human
Rights-Centred Design, Deliberation, and Oversight model
to deal with AI-related ethical issues with legal support.
Based on a global approach, the proposed model integrates
a suit of technical, organisational, and evaluation tools and
techniques involving many stakeholders.
The proposal presents norms based on human rights as
the foundation for ethical standards with which AI systems
must demonstrably comply:
a. Design and development that take stakeholders’ opinions into account. In case an assessment has resulted in
“high” or “very high” risks to human rights, a redesign
should be pursued.
b. Formal assessment and testing to evaluate their compliance with human rights-based standards. It would
occur regularly during the entire life cycle of a system’s
development—design, specification, prototyping, development, and implementation. A systematic and periodic
post-implementation monitoring would be established,
through which the AI system would be submitted for
review by sending out the related documentation and
reports to a public authority.
c. Independent oversight by an external, technically competent entity invested with legal investigation and sanction powers.
d. Auditability supported by traceability and by evidence
that the AI system is operating as desired and that it
was properly documented during its entire life cycle of
development.
The authors highlight the need for laws and norms
encompassing all steps covered by the model.
Good AI society (AI4People, 2018)
Focused on the establishment of a good AI society, the proposal joins ethical principles and specific recommendations
to enable stakeholders to seize opportunities and avoid or
minimise risks.
The model encompasses five ethical principles:
Beneficence, Non-maleficence, Autonomy, Justice, and
Explicability.
The recommendations are categorised as: assessment,
development, incentivisation, and support.
• Assessing institutions on their capacity to reduce the mistakes made by AI systems.
• Considering existing legislation, using participatory
mechanisms to align with social values, and assessing
tasks/decision-making that should not be delegated to
AI systems.
• Assessing current regulations to provide a legislative
framework that could keep pace with technological
developments.
• Developing a framework to enhance the explicability of
AI systems.
• Developing legal procedures to permit the scrutiny of
algorithmic decisions in court.
• Developing auditing mechanisms for AI systems to identify unwanted consequences.
• Developing a process to remedy or compensate for damage caused by AI.
• Developing agreed-upon metrics for the trustworthiness
of AI products and services.
• Developing a new EU oversight agency responsible for
the scientific evaluation and supervision of AI products
and services.
• Developing a European observatory for AI.
• Developing legal instruments to prepare and adjust the
work environment to the changes brought about by AI.
• Financially incentivising a socially preferable development and use of AI.
• Financially incentivising cross-disciplinary cooperation
in the fields of technology, social issues, legal studies,
and ethics.
• Incentivising a regular review of the legislation to foster
socially positive innovation.
• Financially incentivising the use of lawfully special
zones for empirical testing and development.
• Financially incentivising research on the public perception of AI.
• Supporting self-regulatory codes of conduct for data- and
AI-related professionals.
• Supporting corporate boards of directors to take responsibility for the ethical implications of AI technologies in
their organisations.
Framework approaches
An analysis of the approaches adopted by each of the 21
frameworks proposed in the sample resulted in Table 1.
The fact that ethical guidelines exist is not enough to have
any effect on the software development industry. Thus, models that are strongly grounded on ethical principles require
legal mechanisms to fulfill those recommendations (Hagendorff, 2019).
Frameworks that encompass the competencies of government institutions have also foreseen the existence of a
regulatory agency, as well as the need for mechanisms to
Artificial Intelligence Regulation: a framework for governance 517
1 3
help the legislative branch speed up its law-making process,
aiming for a safer and faster AI regulation.
Frameworks that take the social contract into account
rank among the most open to society’s participation in a
co-production with the government. Those models consider citizens as outstanding stakeholders. Concerns over
the impacts on the job market are also a way to assess the
impact on stakeholders.
The main argument that proposes a gradual deployment
of the regulation is a risk mitigation strategy, but it could
also be combined with successive interactions between the
legislative branch and the regulatory agency, thus enabling
continuous improvement during the legislative procedure.
The interactive regulatory governance model, the agile
governance, the ethics guideline for trustworthy AI, the ethically aligned design, the algorithmic impact assessment, the
good AI society, and the AI governance by human rightscentred design, deliberation, and oversight proposals encompass a larger number of topics. The AI HLEG proposal
highlights that a trustworthy AI must be lawful, ethical, and
robust. The others explore the relationship among all parties
involved in the regulation process and the attempt to find
balance between more or less rigid or flexible mechanisms.
It is worth noting that the agile governance proposal does
not exclude conventional actions for a formal regulation—
the interactive regulatory governance model and the competency-based regulatory model, both of which involve the
legislative branch. Therefore, this configures a transitional
situation in which consensual standards would be agreed
upon and enforced, and the risks would be mitigated until
legal mechanisms are made official, which is very similar
to the concept of Dynamic Regulation, in which feedback
serves as a basis for the maturity of the regulatory instrument (Kaal & Vermeulen, 2017).
When analysing several movements advocating the establishment of criteria for best using AI, studies identified an
opportunity to develop a competition around a technological reform (Greene et al., 2019). Pondering over the need to
find synergy among global AI regulation-oriented actions,
a few proposals rely on a worldwide effort, which sometimes is described as an international committee, while other
times just as a joint effort by governments and multinational
companies.
Despite the small number of existing software-based regulation models, similar models are likely to arise, since the
increasing complexity of AI solutions results in more system rules (Lamo & Calo, 2018; Liu, 2017; Prakken, 2017;
Verheij, 2016), which in turn means a higher likelihood of
conflicts among those rules in combined systems (BenchCapon & Modgil, 2017).
AI regulatory and governance framework
The supplementary nature of some of the models confirms
the perception that the impacts of AI would demand a combination of design, laws, and education (Calo, 2011). When
debating over the complexity of a framework to address such
a multidisciplinary topic (Bonnemais et al., 2018) embedded
into the political and social context (Leitner & Stiefmueller,
2019), an AI regulatory and governance framework—AIR—
was built to include the main contributions from each model
in the examined sample (Fig. 1).
Focused on reducing the gap between ethical principles
and actions by each stakeholder and making the relationship
among them in different dimensions of knowledge clearer,
the AIR framework is based on a wide governance process.
Although the government’s exclusive competencies
are highlighted, aiming for more accuracy in its actions,
the power of the State has been distributed among the
legislative, the executive, and the judicial branches. This
Table 1  Comparative table
of the approaches explored in
the frameworks, compiled by
author.
518 P. G. R. de Almeida et al.
1 3
segmentation is used by many countries as a functional
way to distribute power, according to which the legislative
creates the laws, the executive enforces those laws, and the
judicial is in charge of solving whatever conflicts arise to
guarantee justice and law abidance (Maluf, 1995).
Apart from making laws, it is crucial to maintain the legislative branch open so that its bills (B) can be discussed
with society, receiving constant feedback and contributions
not only through e-participation systems, but also through
a special channel established with scholars, who could also
attend the legislative committee meetings (F).
The Parliament or Congress, as an instance of the legislative branch, would approve a statute (J) to create an
AI regulatory agency as part of the Federal Government
(executive branch). This could be a good moment to define
AI, or at least to demand that the agency do it.
Upon its creation, the regulatory agency would establish a strong relationship with the Parliament as part of
an ongoing process in which the legislative would survey the impact on the legislation and its evolution based
on the knowledge obtained from the regulatory agency
(T2R—Technology-To-Regulatory), much like the regulatory agency structures its internal work processes based on
the legislation discussed and approved by the legislative
(R2T—Regulatory-To-Technology).
The T2R is necessary, at least until each new category
of AI systems has been deeply studied by the regulatory
agency. Due to the complexity and specificity of AI services
and products, laws could potentially be created for each
Fig. 1  AIR framework
Artificial Intelligence Regulation: a framework for governance 519
1 3
specific field. The natural evolution of the former would also
cause the latter to evolve in the long term. A practical way
to implement the T2R flow is through the regulatory agency
frequently attending the legislative committee meetings to
discuss AI regulation.
As a complement to T2R, the R2T flow would be started
at least when a new version of a bill is discussed at the legislative committee meetings and when a new law is approved.
R2T also feeds other internal processes of the regulatory
agency in order to update them with the legislative understanding of what can be regulated by law, which can trigger
three reactions: (a) alerts regarding the limitations that the
bill/law brings to the ongoing projects of the industries and
service providers; (b) opportunities to expand the standards
by discussing them with the industries and service providers;
and (c) updating certification and auditing processes with
new compliance issues.
Among the regulatory agency’s competencies, a couple
of processes require speed and synergy: analysing how the
legislation affects the technology process and standardising
the research, certification, and auditing processes. In order
to be effective, those processes must consider a huge number
of variables involved in the entire lifecycle of an AI system:
design, prototyping, development, testing, deployment, commercialisation, and use. The efficiency and knowledge of the
regulatory agency are expected to possess depend on mechanisms that support those processes (Fig. 2): formal representation models for ethical dilemmas, impact on stakeholders’
assessment according to ethical principles, data governance
assessment, development process assessment, systems to
identify biased machine learning, and assessment of risk
mitigation measures.
Being responsible for a closer interaction between the
Parliament and the regulatory agency due to the R2T flow,
the analyses of how the legislation affects the technology
process must be corroborated with information structures
that are able to represent the law based on a technical mindset. Those involved must be skilled in both areas of knowledge. The quality and efficiency of this synchronicity of
mixed mindsets are strengthened by means of a data repository shared by the Parliament and the regulatory agency.
Examples of such data would include: issues related to
whether AI projects/products comply with the law, AI project/product impact assessment, legislation/regulation collected overtime across AI projects/products, ethical committee decisions upon approval requests, AI project/product
and regulatory assessments under both private and public
guidelines.
In order to offer controlled autonomy to the AI industry,
technical standards must be established while bills are being
discussed. An agile interaction between the “industries and
service providers” and the regulatory agency is supported
by the standardisation of the research process (D). Despite
being a process inside the regulatory agency, standardising
research actions entails an in-depth study of ethical and safe
mechanisms to make the new projects seen in the AI market
feasible. A very technically skilled staff must be allocated to
that task, which requires robust laboratories.
As a strategy to motivate the AI market to follow the best
practices, standards, and laws (when they exist), the regulatory agency would certify products and services using a
certification process (H). Companies that submit their products to the regulatory agency, after a successful appraisal,
would receive a certificate (C) within their field of action
(transport, healthcare, entertainment, education, military,
Fig. 2  Regulatory agency in the
AIR framework
520 P. G. R. de Almeida et al.
1 3
etc.). The strictness and nature of the assessment process
could be different for each of those fields. It is also a way to
communicate to society where people can place their trust
when buying or using an AI system.
Through a quick process, the industries and service providers would need to receive the regulatory agency’s certification rules stated as clearly as possible (I), while providing
feedback (F) on the conditions that preclude the development process required by the regulatory agency from moving
forward. Accountability requirements would be assured if
those lists would show not only new products and services
that have been certified, but also those that have lost their
certification.
The issuance of certificates could be a strategy to be
applied before laws are passed, since they already inform
society, in a transparent fashion, about the safety levels and
risks of the products and services it consumes. Advertising campaigns by the government and certified companies
would also strengthen that strategy.
A robust strategy to avoid fake certifications would be
desirable, such as a blockchain mechanism implemented
by the agency containing the updated certification list for a
given country. Aiming to increase citizen trust in AI certification, certificates could be issued using a digital signature
in the system’s code, setting an attribute associated with that
specific code version. In case someone wants to know if the
version of a commercialised AI system is updated, all they
need to do is compare the digital signature with the one that
is available on the regulatory agency’s website.
The regulatory agency could make an “algorithm impact
assessment questionnaire” (M) available to the industries
and government institutions in order to offer a simulation
tool through which they could know, in advance, their level
of compliance. It would also fit as a preparation stage for a
certification submission.
And finally, an auditing process (L) would be supported
by the regulatory agency to check companies demanding
certification and certified companies that need to update
their certification, as well as to verify issues demanded by
courts in case of sentences related to damages supposedly
caused by AI systems. This audit would take place in five
dimensions: impact on stakeholders based on ethical principles, data governance, development process models, identification of biased machine learning, and risk mitigation
measures. The auditing process should be part of regular
monitoring through which not only internal changes in companies, but also future problems coming from new arrangements in society could be identified.
Any failures or damages noticed in a certified AI product or service must trigger an internal audit process to
identify whether there were problems or limitations in
other agency processes that could be a reminder of internal improvement. In a broader, more transparent fashion,
the agency should publish the audit results and the next
steps (S).
The regulatory agency’s processes are interconnected
through a knowledge stemming from the mechanisms shown
in Fig. 2, which should be handled as much as possible by a
skilled multidisciplinary team, since the ethical and technological dimensions are mixed.
Mechanisms for formally representing ethical dilemmas
are important to create a transparent communication channel
between ethicists and technical profiles. It could also help
distinguish between the part of the decision-making algorithm that is related to a dilemma and the rest of the code
in relation to which there is a consensus regarding the best
decision. This representation model is expected to be continually improving as society changes and new dilemmas are
identified. This analysis is interconnected with the impact on
the stakeholders’ assessment according to ethical principles.
As each company has its own system development process, the regulatory agency must have a process to guarantee
a broad system development process assessment, probably
by attempting to measure the sample against the best practices and the risks related to each step that does not follow
them.
Since a biased machine learning can result from problems
with data collection, testing algorithms, or decision models,
the regulatory agency must consider all those phases in its
development process assessment models. A data governance
assessment is an important analysis that is connected to the
system development process as well as to the biased machine
learning identification process.
The results of the regulatory agency’s analysis materialise the total sum of all risks identified in an evaluated AI
product or service for which there should be a risk mitigation plan.
As the regulatory agency is a natural actor to create and
communicate the best practices to the industries and service providers, the agency must be aware of all projects and
trends in the AI market, otherwise companies will not adopt
those practices. An alternative to mitigate that risk is to
strengthen the dialogue with the industries and service providers on the purpose of contributing to industry standards
(N), thus allowing technology to improve its development
while the legislation is still under debate, or in case it is not
necessary. On the industries’ and service providers’ side, in
order to increase the probability of a successful investment, a
gradual strategy supported by a governance model should be
behind the implementation of those good practices. Industry standards (N) must incorporate all parameters that are
needed for communication among the “industries and service providers” along the entire value chain of an AI system.
As happens in Parliament, an open practice by the regulatory agency is likewise desirable, receiving feedback from
academia (F). That feedback and those contributions, among
Artificial Intelligence Regulation: a framework for governance 521
1 3
other information, could be how society perceives ethical
behaviours. A partnership between academia and the regulatory agency, combining scholars and researchers in the
agency’s staff, could be a sustainable alternative for maintaining a highly skilled team of professionals dealing with
many processes simultaneously.
At an advanced level of an AI governance model, a “society-on-the loop” mechanism could be structured to collect
the evaluation of a certain category of AI systems based on
their behaviour using an ethical approach.  Both civil society and academia could accomplish this. The answers (T)
would feed the regulatory agency in the form of a survey
to identify potential opportunities for improvement in its
internal processes.
Regardless of the existence of a “society-on-the loop”
mechanism, academia is always a good, reliable source of
risk analysis reports (R) to be published periodically.
Law enforcement by courts would also undergo a continuous learning process with regard to interpretations based on
the legislation in effect, as well as on new laws. In countries
where the certification is incorporated into laws, decisions
on cases involving uncertified companies would be treated
differently from those involving certified companies. Thus,
society and the courts would need to have up-to-date information about each company’s certified products and services (K). Considering a continuous learning process, the
regulatory agency would receive the judgment decisions
of all cases involving AI systems (E), which would then
be stored in the data repository shared with the Parliament.
The decisions on cases may indicate types of AI technology
use that the regulatory agency has not researched yet, and
they may also indicate the need for changes in the legislation. A significant challenge would be to identify when an
incident is avoidable or not. In those situations, experts must
be involved in the investigation to find out the purpose of
supporting the courts.
In order to balance the equation that rules the job market
on the path to a digital economy, the government may create public policies (P) to make it feasible to implement in a
timely manner the changes required in employer and student
skills. Public policies might also be necessary to maintain an
advertising campaign to inform people about the importance
of certification and standards for AI products and services,
helping them to identify when there is a potential case of an
AI-embedded system.
As usual, public policies are a long-term strategy that
may require actions by different government institutions,
but there are many alternatives for implementing them,
depending on the country. The regulatory agency may
also provide government institutions with information
about where and how those changes are needed. In some
cases, by means of the T2R flow, the agency may notify
the Parliament that a law is lacking that better regulates
public policies.
On a national level, discussions to facilitate priority
actions and the recognition of industry standards would be
enabled through an AI Governance Committee, bringing
together the public and private sectors (G). The synergy of
efforts for the benefit of all stakeholders must be established,
since many variables are considered. Beyond the regulatory
agency, other government institutions would probably participate in this national committee, due to the wide impact its
decisions could have. For instance, building human capacity
and preparing the labour market transformation is a decision
that might require a strategy that impacts many ministries
and state governments. Adjustments to the current legislation related to many different subjects should probably be
made to support the whole transition.
We should not forget the committee’s governance
approach, which requires working with indicators, i.e. data
produced by its stakeholders. Therefore, a national AI governance committee would require at least collection, storage, and analysis processes within other institutions and
businesses.
The agreed-upon standards (N) make it possible to move
forward in some technological dimensions, while the Parliament discusses adjustments to the legislation when necessary. The risk management criteria (O) related to the use of
those standards would be negotiated between the national
committee and the industries and service providers, since
each standard could impact a long productive chain.
The plethora of components in AI services and products
of global reach imposes actions that would be agreed upon
in an International Governance Committee comprising representatives from each country’s committee (A). On many
occasions, transparency in production processes is only feasible through complex international agreements, because
corporate trade policies must adapt to different countries. A
global strategy could be established to facilitate the production and delivery of standards, as well as the dissemination
of best practices in undeveloped countries, since without that
help the gap between them and the countries in which an
AI governance has been established would increase hugely,
putting them in a fragile position. In that regard, one should
keep in mind that international standards are not limited to
technological issues. Further, those standards also incorporate ethical principles, despite any cultural differences. The
Universal Declaration of Human Rights could be a global
base to engage governments to face the challenge of dealing
with differences among national legislations.
The expert skills and engagement power of self-regulated
organisations are a rich contribution to the international AI
governance committee.
A possible adjustment entails the segmentation of tasks
in charge of the regulatory agency, sharing them with or
522 P. G. R. de Almeida et al.
1 3
transferring them to other government institutions. For
instance, the audit process could also be implemented by different government institutions in charge of auditing cases of
discrimination using personal data, or investigations related
to the development of autonomous weapons in that country.
Hence, it is important to highlight that laws such as the EU
GDPR (2016) only affect personal data. Nonetheless, AI
discrimination risks have a wider reach than personal data.
Sharing the standardisation process with specialised private-sector organisations could also be an alternative. In that
case, the connection between the standardisation process and
the other regulatory agency processes should be maintained.
Despite being represented as a unique institution, the regulatory agency could be materialised as a group of agencies
distributed across the country. To that effect, partnerships
among countries could also allow for the creation of a set
of agencies sharing resources, processes, and knowledge.
In both cases, agencies could specialise in different categories of AI products and services. Although the certification
issued for a specific category is independent of the certificate issued for another category, a communication process
among the agencies is needed to increase the knowledge of
how each AI product/service behaves and evolves over time.
Another adjustment to how the AIR framework is interpreted relates to what can be classified as “industries and
service providers”. Private-sector companies are considered
first. However, since any organisation that develops AI systems or offers services based on AI systems would fall in
that category, public organisations may also be included.
Conclusion
The need and urgency to regulate Artificial Intelligence
seem indisputable. The complexity of the topic is also evident, whether due to the advanced nature of technology or
because its impacts structurally affect social standards. This
combination materialises the perception of a problem that is
yet to be completely defined.
A study of the literature through a sample comprising
109 documents (articles, laws, and government strategies)
revealed significant efforts to identify and scale the risks and
ethical dilemmas related to AI, as well as to seek a model for
regulating AI based on different methodologies.
The heterogeneous nature of the professional profiles
involved in the debate evinces the complexity and maturity with which the topic is being studied. Such an in-depth
approach, on the one hand, may have caused certain delays
in research, but on the other, it has prevented inappropriate
regulatory solutions from being made official.
We had also seen the birth of a reshaped perception of the
legislation, as had occurred with disruptive innovations in
the past, when legislative efforts focused on adapting laws to
the new paradigms brought about by electricity, telephone,
and computers. Since this is a more difficult challenge, AI
lawmakers will consider that we are still starting to discover
the applications of smart algorithms. Therefore, a balance
must be kept between a rigid damage prevention and technological development strategy (Gurkaynak et al., 2016).
Despite all efforts being directed to AI regulation and
governance, there is still an expressive gap between ethical principles and a functional model that is able to encompass all areas of knowledge that are necessary to deal with
the required complexity. The 21 proposed models found in
the sample are based on supplementary approaches and are
therefore insufficient when analysed separately. Due to the
heterogeneous nature of those skills and interests, an ideal
model should harmonise interests, offering benefits to all
stakeholders during the entire lifecycle of an AI product or
service.
The consolidation and process orientation approach proposed by the AIR framework (Fig. 1) seems to be the most
adequate strategy for the deployment of an AI governance,
given the existence of several agents and the laterality of
the topic, which intertwines different areas of knowledge.
The expanded view of the presented AIR framework will
enable all agents involved to identify their role in the governance process, while establishing a roadmap for a gradual and
uninterrupted deployment.
It also contributes to the creation of a new reward and
punishment model to balance out this new reality (Bryson,
2018; Waser, 2015), taking into account the world as it will
be (Lin et al., 2011).
On the path to improve each component of the AIR
framework, more than bringing them closer together, there
needs to be a synchronisation of stakeholders towards a sustainable regulation. Along that journey, an alliance between
scholars and the government’s three agents (the executive,
legislative, and judicial branches) is crucial for the macroprocess of regulation.
The countries leading the debate are probably ready to
coordinate the partnerships and agreements among institutions that are necessary for a comprehensive and effective
governance, as well as to initiate a regulation process. Nonetheless, the launch of AI-embedded products in countries
that have advanced regulation models, in and of itself, does
not guarantee the same safety levels for countries that are
still unripe in this regard.
Much is yet to happen in the formulation of solutions
using real-case scenarios to enable an empirical analysis
and studies of the evolution of the models presented in
the examined sample. To that effect, the AIR framework
can make it tangible and feasible to synchronise all the
stakeholders’ efforts to achieve an effective result, thus
culminating in the creation of a reference model of AI
Artificial Intelligence Regulation: a framework for governance 523
1 3
governance in which maturity levels would be established
that could be monitored by international bodies in a collaborative action. The way we and future generations will
live our lives depends on that cooperation.
References
Aayog, N. (2018). National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence: #AI
for All (Discussion Paper) https://www.niti.gov.in/writereadd
ata/files/document_publication/NationalStrategy-for-AI-Discu
ssion-Paper.pdf. Accessed 30 July 2020.
Adadi, A., & Berrada, M. (2018). Peeking inside the black-box: A
survey on Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI). IEEE
Access Review, 6, 52138–52160
AI HLEG - High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence.
(2019a). A definition of AI: Main capabilities and disciplines.
Definition developed for the purpose of the AI HLEG’s
deliverables.
AI HLEG - High-Level Expert Group on Artificial. (2019b). Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI. High-level expert group on
artificial intelligence for the European Commission.
AI4People. (2018). Ethical framework for a good society: opportunities, risks, principles, and recommendations. Atomium – European Institute for Science, Media and Democracy. http://www.
eismd.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/Ethical-Framework-fora-Good-AI-Society.pdf. Accessed 21 June 2019.
Amigoni, F., & Schiaffonati, V. (2018). Ethics for robots as experimental technologies. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine,
25, 30–36
Arkin, R. C. (2011). Governing lethal behavior: Embedding ethics in
a hybrid deliberative/reactive robot architecture. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM/IEEE international conference on Human
robot interaction, 121–128.
Arnold, T., & Scheutz, M. (2018). The big red button is too late:
an alternative model for the ethical evaluation of AI systems.
Ethics and Information Technology, 20, 59–69
Beltran, N. (2020). Artificial intelligence in Lethal Autonomous
Weapon Systems: What’s the problem? Uppsala University –
Department of Theology.
Bench-Capon, T., & Modgil, S. (2017). Norms and value based reasoning: Justifying compliance and violation. Artificial Intelligence & Law Review, 25, 29–64
Benjamins, V. R. & García I. S. (2020). Towards a framework for
understanding societal and ethical implications of Artificial
Intelligence. Vulnerabilidad y cultura digital by Dykinson. pp
87–98.
Black, J. (2002) Critical reflections on regulation. Australian Journal of Legal Philosopy, 27, 1–35. http://www.austlii.edu.au/
au/journals/AUJlLegPhil/2002/1.pdf. Accessed 30 July 2020.
Bonnemais, V., Saurel, C., & Tessier, C. (2018). Embedded ethics:
Some technical and ethical challenges. Ethics and Information
Technology, 20, 41–58
Buiten, C. M. (2019). Towards intelligent regulation of artificial intelligence. European Journal of Risk Regulation, 10(1), 41–59
Boden, M., Bryson, J., Caldwell, D., Dautenhahn, K., Edwards, L.,
Kember, S., Newman, P., Parry, V., Pegman, G., Rodden, T.,
Sorrell, T., Wallis, M., Whitby, B., & Winfield, A. (2017).
Principles of robotics: Regulating robots in the real world.
Connection Science, 29(2), 124–129
Bonnemains, V., Saurel, C., & Tessier, C. (2018). Embedded ethics: Some technical and ethical challenges. Ethics Information
Technology., 20, 41
Borgesius, F. Z. (2018). Discrimination, artificial intelligence, and
algorithmic decision-making. Study for the Council of Europe.
Bostrom, N. (2014). Superintelligence: Paths, dangers, strategies.
Oxford University Press.
Bryson, J. J. (2018). Patiency is not a virtue: The design of intelligent systems and systems of ethics. Ethics and Information
Technology, 20, 15–26
Butterworth, M. (2018). The ICO and artificial intelligence: The role
of fairness in the GDPR framework. Computer Law & Security
Review, 34, 257–268
Calo, M. R. (2011). Peeping hals. Artificial Intelligence Review, 175,
940–994
Calo, M. R. (2015). Robotics and the lessons of cyberlaw. California
Law Review, 103(3), 513–563
Caron, M. S., & Gupta, A. (2020). The social contract for AI. Cornell University. https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.08140v1 Accessed
6 Dec 2020.
Canada Government. (2020). Algorithmic Impact Assessment.
https://www.canada.ca/en/government/system/digital-gover
nment/digital-government-innovations/responsible-use-ai/
algorithmic-impact-assessment.html. Accessed 15 Dec 2020.
Carter, D. (2020). Regulation and ethics in artificial intelligence
and machine learning technologies: Where are we now? Who
is responsible? Can the information professional play a role?
Business Information Review., 37(2), 60–68
Cath, C., Watcher, S., Mittelsadt, B., Taddeo, M., & Floridi, L.
(2017). Artificial Intelligence and the ‘Good Society’: the US,
EU, and UK approach. https://ssrn.com/abstract=2906249 or
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2906249. Accessed 21 June 2019.
Cave, S., Nyrup, R., Vold, K., & Weller, A. (2019). Motivations
and risks of machine ethics. Proceedings of the IEEE, 107(3),
562–574
Cerka, P., Grigiene, J., & Sirbikite, G. (2015). Liability for damages
caused by artificial intelligence. Computer Law & Security
Review, 31(3), 376–389
Cerka, P., Grigiene, J., & Sirbikyte, G. (2017). Is it possible to grant
legal personality to artificial intelligence software systems?
Computer Law & Security Review, 33(5), 685–699
Conitzer, V., Sinnott-Armstrong, W., Borg, J. S, Deng, Y., & Kramer,
M. (2017). Moral decision making for artificial intelligence.
AAAI Publication, 31º Conference on Artificial Intelligence
Council of Europe. (2018). European commission for the efficiency
of justice, ‘European ethical charter on the use of artificial
intelligence in judicial systems and their environment. https://
rm.coe.int/ethical-charter-en-for-publication-4-december2018/16808f699c. Accessed 30 July 2020.
Davis, E. (2015). Ethical guidelines for a superintelligence. Artificial
Intelligence Review, 220, 121–124
Dennis, L., Fisher, M., Slavkovik, M., & Webster, M. (2016). Formal
verification of ethical choices in autonomous systems. Robotics
and Autonomous Systems, 77, 1–14
Djeffal, C. (2018). Sustainable AI Development (SAID): On the road
to more access to justice. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3298980 or
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3298980. Accessed 30 July 2020.
Donahoe, E., & Metzger, M. M. (2019). Artificial intelligence and
human rights. Journal of Democracy, 30(2), 115–126
Dubai (2019). Smart Dubai. Artificial intelligence principles and
ethics. https://smartdubai.ae/initiatives/ai-principles-ethics.
Accessed 20 July 2020.
EU GDPR. (2016). European Parliament. General Data Protection
Regulation. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679. Accessed 30 July 2020.
EU Parliament. (2012). Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (2012/C 326/02), Official Journal of the European
Union, 2012 C 326, (pp. 391).
524 P. G. R. de Almeida et al.
1 3
European Commission. (2019). Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, The European
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the
Regions. Brussels. https://www.eea.europa.eu/policy-docum
ents/communication-from-the-commission-to-1. Accessed 30
July 2020.
Firth-Butterfield, K. (2017). Artificial Intelligence and the Law: More
questions than answers. Scitech Lawyer, 14, 28–31
Fjeld, J., Achten, N., Hilligoss, H., Nagy, A. C., & Srikumar, M.
(2020). Principled Artificial Intelligence: Mapping Consensus
in Ethical and Rights-based Approaches to Principles for AI.
Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society.
Floridi, L., Cowls, J., King, T., & Taddeo, M. (2020). How to design AI
for social good: seven essential factors. Science and Engineering
Ethics, 26, 1771
French, P. M. (2018). For a Meaningful Artificial Intelligence: Toward
a French and European Strategy. Mission assigned by the French
Prime Minister. https://www.aiforhumanity.fr/pdfs/MissionVil
lani_Report_ENG-VF.pdf. Accessed 30 July 2020.
Future of Life Institute. (2019a). National and International AI Strategies. https://futureoflife.org/national-international-ai-strategies/.
Accessed 20 September 2019.
Future of Life Institute. (2019b). Ansilomar AI Principles. https://futur
eoflife.org/ai-principles/. Accessed 20 September 2019.
German Federal Government. (2018). German Federal Ministry of
Education and Research, the Federal Ministry for Economic
Affairs and Energy, and the Federal Ministry of Labor and Social
Affairs. Artificial Intelligence Strategy. https://www.ki-strategiedeutschland.de/home.html. Accessed 30 July 2020.
Greene, D., Hoffmann, A. L., & Stark, L. (2019). Better, nicer, clearer,
fairer: A critical assessment of the movement for ethical artificial
intelligence and machine learning. Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 52nd, 2019.
Gregor, S. (2006). The nature of theory in information systems. MIS
Quarterly, 30(3), 611–642
Gurkaynak, G., Yilmaz, I., & Haksever, G. (2016). Stifling artificial
intelligence: Human perils. Computer Law & Security Review,
32(5), 749–758
Hagendorff, T. (2019). The ethics of AI ethics: An evaluation of guidelines. CoRR, abs/1903.03425.
Hilb, M. (2020). Toward artificial governance? The role of artificial
intelligence in shaping the future or corporate governance. Journal of Management and Governance.
Hildebrandt, M. (2018). Algorithmic regulation and the rule of law.
Philosophy Transactions of the Royal Society, 376 (2128).
Holder, C., Khurana, V., Harrison, F., & Jacobs, L. (2016a). Robotics and law: Key legal and regulatory implications of the robotics age (Part I of II). Computer Law & Security Review, 32(3),
383–402
Holder, C., Khurana, V., Hook, J., Bacon, G., & Day, R. (2016b).
Robotics and law: key legal and regulatory implications of the
robotics age (Part II of II). Computer Law Secure Review, 32,
557–576
House of Lords. (2018). AI in the UK: Ready, willing and able? Select
Committee on Artificial Intelligence, Report of Session 2017–19.
13 March 2018.
IEEE. (2019). Ethically Aligned Design. Committees of The IEEE
Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems. 2nd version. https://standards.ieee.org/content/dam/ieeestandards/standards/web/documents/other/ead_v2.pdf. Accessed
20 July 2020
IEEE. (2020). a call to action for business using AI—Ethically aligned
design for business. https://standards.ieee.org/content/dam/ieeestandards/standards/web/documents/other/ead/ead-for-business.
pdf. Accessed 20 July 2020.
Jackson, B. W. (2019). Artificial Intelligence and the Fog of Innovation: A deep-dive on governance and the liability of autonomous
systems. 35 Santa Clara High Tech. L.J. 35
Jackson, B. W. (2020). Cybersecurity, privacy, and artificial intelligence: An examination of legal issues surrounding the European
Union General Data Protection Regulation and Autonomous Network Defense, 21 Minnesota Journal of Law, Science & Technology, 21
Jobin, A., Ienca, M., & Vayena, E. (2019). The global landscape of
AI ethics guidelines. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1, 389–399.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-019-0088-2Accessed20July2020
Japanese Cabinet Office. (2019). Social principles of human-centric
artificial intelligence. Council for science, technology and innovation, https://www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/english/humancentricai.pdf.
Accessed 20 July 2020
Kaal, W. A., & Vermeulen, E. P.M. (2017). How to regulate disruptive
innovation: From facts to data. Jurimetrics, 57(2).
Kozuka, S. (2019). A governance framework for the development and
use of artificial intelligence: Lessons from the comparison of
Japanese and European initiatives. Uniform Law Review, 24,
315–329
Kunz, J. (1949). The United Nations declaration of human rights.
American Journal of International Law, 43(2), 316–323
Larsson, S. (2020). On the governance of artificial intelligence through
ethics guidelines. Asian Journal of Law and Society, 1–23.
Lenardon, J. P. A. (2017). The Regulation of Artificial Intelligence.
Master Thesis. Tilburg Institute for Law, Technology and Society.
Netherlands.
Lewis, D., Hogan, L., Filip, D., & Wall, P. J. (2020). Global challenges
in the standardization of ethics for trustworthy AI. https://doi.org/
10.5281/zenodo.3516525. Accessed 30 July 2020.
Lamo, M. & Calo, R. (2018). Regulating Bot Speech. UCLA Law
Review 2019, July 16, 2018.
Leitner, C., & Stiefmueller, C. M. (2019). Disruptive technologies and
the public sector: The changing dynamics of governance. In A.
Baimenov & P. Liverakos (Eds.), Public service excellence in the
21st century. (pp. 238–239). Palgrave Macmillan.
Lewis, T., & Yildirim, H. (2002). Learning by doing and dynamic regulation. The RAND Journal of Economics, 33(1), 22–36. www.
jstor.org/stable/2696373 Accessed 20 July 2020.
Lin, P., Abney, K., & Bekey, G. (2011). Robot ethics: Mapping the
issues for a mechanized world. Artificial Intelligence Review,
175, 942–949
Lin, Y., Hung, T., & Huang, L. T. (2020). Engineering equity: How AI
can help reduce the harm of implicit bias. Philosophy & Technology. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-020-00406-7
Liu, H. (2017). Irresponsibilities, inequalities and injustice for autonomous vehicles. Ethics Information Technology Journal, 19,
193–207
Maluf S. (1995). Teoria Geral do Estado. 23ª ed., 205–208. Editora
Saraiva. São Paulo.
Mantelero, A. (2018). AI & Big Data: A blueprint for human rights,
social and ethical impact assessment. Computer Law & Security
Review, 34(4), 754–772
Mika, N., Nadezhda, G., Jaana, L., & Raija, K., (2019). Ethical AI
for the governance of the Society: Challenges and opportunities.
CEUR Workshop Proceedings, 2505, 20–26. http://ceur-ws.org/
Vol-2505/paper03.pdf. Accessed 20 July 2020.
Millar, J. (2016). An ethics evaluation tool for automating ethical decision-making in robots and self-driving cars. Applied Artificial
Intelligence, 30(8), 787–809
Monetary Authority of Singapore. (2019). Monetary Authority of
Singapore. Principles to promote fairness, ethics, accountability and transparency (FEAT) in the use of artificial intelligence
and data analytics in Singapore’s Financial Sector. https://www.
mas.gov.sg/~/media/MAS/News%20and%20Publications/
Artificial Intelligence Regulation: a framework for governance 525
1 3
Monographs%20and%20Information%20Papers/FEAT%20 Principles%20Final.pdf. Accessed 20 July 2020
Nevejans, N. (2016). European civil law rules in robotics. Study
requested by the European Parliament’s Committee on Legal
Affairs. Policy Department Citizens’ Right and Constitutional
Affairs.
Neznamov, A. V. (2020). Regulatory landscape of artificial intelligence
advances in social science, education and humanities research,
volume 420 pp 201–204. XVII International Research-to-Practice Conference 2020. Atlantatis Press.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2019).
‘Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence’.
Partnership on AI to Benefit People and Society. (2016) https://www.
partnershiponai.org/about/. Accessed 12 July 2020.
Pedro, A. P. (2014). Ética, moral, axiologia e valores: confusões e
ambiguidades em torno de um conceito comum. Kriterion, vol.
55. Belo Horizonte, nº 130, Dez./2014, 483–498.
Poel, I. V. (2016). An ethical framework for evaluating experimental
technology. Science and Engineering Ethics, 22(3), 667–686
Prakken, H. (2017). On the problem of making autonomous vehicles
conform to traffic law. Artificial Intelligence & Law, 25, 341–363
Rahwan, I. (2017). Society-in-the-loop: Programming the algorithmic
social contract. Ethics and Information Technology., 20, 5–14
Reed, C. (2018). How should we regulate artificial intelligence? Philosophy Transactions of the Royal Society, 376, 2128
Riek, L. D., & Howard, D. (2014). A code of ethics for human-robot
interaction profession proceedings of we robot, 2014. SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2757805. Accessed 20 July 2020.
Rousseau, J. (2016). The Social Contract. (202–230). ISBN:
978911495741. London: Sovereign.
Russell, S., & Norvig, P. (1995). Artificial Intelligence. A Modern
Approach. (pp. 4–5). Prentice Hall.
Scherer, M. U. (2016). Regulating artificial intelligence systems: Risks,
challenges, competences and strategies. Harvard Journal of Law
& Technology, 29(2), 354–398
Schrader, D., & Ghosh, D. (2018). Proactively protecting against the
singularity: Ethical decision making AI. IEEE Computer and
Reliability Societies Review, 16(3), 56–63
Smuha, N. A. (2020). Beyond a human rights-based approach to AI
governance: Promise. Philosophy & Technology.
Taddeo, M., & Floridi, L. (2018). How AI can be a force for good: An
ethical framework will help to harness the potential of AI while
keeping humans in control. Science Review, 361(6404), 751–752
Toronto. (2020). The Toronto declaration: Protecting the right to equality and non-discrimination in machine learning systems. https://
www.torontodeclaration.org/. Accessed 20 July 2020
Tutt, A. (2017). An FDA for algorithms. Administrative Law Review,
69(83), 83–123
UK Government. (2018). Government response to House of Lords Artificial Intelligence Select Committee’s Report on AI in the UK:
Ready, Willing and Able? https://www.gov.uk/government/publi
cations/ai-in-the-uk-ready-willing-and-able-government-respo
nse-to-the-select-committee-report. Accessed 31 December 2020
United Nations. (2011). UN guiding principles on business and human
rights. (p. 2011). UN Human Rights Council.
University of Montreal. (2018). Montreal Declaration for a Responsible Development of Artificial Intelligence. https://www.montr
ealdeclaration-responsibleai.com/the-declaration Accessed 20
July 2020
US Congress. (2019). H.Res.153 - Supporting the de7velopment of
guidelines for ethical development of artificial intelligence.
https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-resolution/
153?q=%7B%22search%22%3A%5B%22ARTIFICIAL+INTEL
LIGENCE%22%5D%7D&s=2&r=4
US Congress. (2020). s.3891 – Advancing Artificial Intelligence
Research Act of 2020. https://www.congress.gov/bill/116thcongress/senate-bill/3891?q=%7B%22search%22%3A%5B%
22ARTIFICIAL+INTELLIGENCE%22%5D%7D&s=3&r=7
Villaronga, E. F., & Heldeweg, M. (2018). Regulation, I presume?
Said the robot: Towards an iterative regulatory process for robot
governance. Computer Law & Security Review, 21 June, 2018.
Verheij, B. (2016). Formalizing value-guided argumentation for ethical systems design. Artificial Intelligence & Law Review, 24(4),
387–407
Yeung, K., Howes, A., & Pogrebna, G. (2019). AI governance by
human rights-centred design, deliberation and oversight: An end
to ethics washing (June 21, 2019). Forthcoming in M Dubber and
F Pasquale (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of AI Ethics, Oxford
University Press (2019), https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3435011.
Accessed 15 December 2020.
Wallach, W., & Marchant, G. E. (2018). An agile ethical/legal model
for the international and national governance of ai and robotics.
Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6191666/. Accessed 20
July 2020
Waser, M. (2015). Designing, implementing and enforcing a coherent system of laws, ethics and morals for intelligent machines
(including humans). Procedia Computer Science, 71, 106–111
Wright, S. A., & Schultz, A. (2018). The rising tide of artificial intelligence and business automation: Developing an ethical framework. Business Horizons, 61(6), 823–832
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
