_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
*Corresponding author: Email: jasminbharadiya92@gmail.com;
J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023
Journal of Engineering Research and Reports
Volume 25, Issue 3, Page 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
ISSN: 2582-2926
Rise of Artificial Intelligence in
Business and Industry
Jasmin Praful Bharadiya a*, Reji Kurien Thomas b

and Farhan Ahmed c
a University of the Cumberlands, United States.
b Swiss School of Business and Management, Geneva, Switzerland.
c Mid Sweden University, Sweden.
Authors’ contributions
This work was carried out in collaboration among all authors. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Article Information
DOI: 10.9734/JERR/2023/v25i3893
Open Peer Review History:
This journal follows the Advanced Open Peer Review policy. Identity of the Reviewers, Editor(s) and additional Reviewers,
peer review comments, different versions of the manuscript, comments of the editors, etc are available here:
https://www.sdiarticle5.com/review-history/100807
Received: 27/03/2023
Accepted: 29/05/2023
Published: 05/06/2023
ABSTRACT
The ongoing development of business and the most recent advances in artificial intelligence (AI)
allow for the many business practices to be improved by the capacity to establish new forms of
collaboration, which is a significant competitive advantage. This rapidly developing technology
enables to offer brand services and even some new forms of business interactions with consumers
and personnel. The digitalization of AI concurrently emphasized for businesses that they need
concentrate on their present strategies while also routinely and early pursuing new chances in the
market. Not only in business but also in different industry sectors, Al techniques are being used and
revolutionized different industry sectors. This review focuses on the application of AI techniques in
business and different industries.
Keywords: Artificial intelligence; business; healthcare; pharmaceutical; industry; machine learning ML.
Review Article
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
86
1. INTRODUCTION
Artificial intelligence (AI) is causing a revolution
in business as well as the economy and society
as a whole by changing the interactions and
relationships that exist between stakeholders and
individuals. The roots of artificial intelligence may
be traced back to mythology from ancient
Chinese, Greek, and other civilizations, where it
was believed that automatons have true brains
and were able to think and experience emotion.
This is where the concept of artificial intelligence
first emerged. However, according to Nilsson, the
term "artificial intelligence" was first used in
public during a workshop held in 1956 at
Dartmouth College in the United States [1]. Since
then, researchers from a variety of
academic fields have made contributions to the
field of artificial intelligence. Researchers in
business management have been looking at how
AI affects customers, businesses, and
stakeholders in an increasingly automated and
interconnected business world [2]. Computer
scientists have created sophisticated deep
learning algorithms [1,3]. Social scientists have
been debating the ethical and legal ramifications
of AI. Despite this, most of these advancements
in AI research have been carried out in isolated
enclaves with relatively little collaboration
between different fields of study. In the same
vein, it has not been easy to settle on a single
definition of AI that is generally recognized by
most people. The many concepts of AI systems
have been organized by Russell and Norvig [4]
into four categories along two dimensions: the
human performance-rationality dimension and
the reasoning-behavior dimension. Systems that
act like people, systems that think rationally,
systems that think like humans, and
systems that think like humans are all examples
of these types of artificial intelligence.
Natural language processing, knowledge
representation, automated reasoning, the use of
the stored information to answer questions and
draw new conclusions and machine learning
should all be included in AI systems [4-6].
Natural language processing, knowledge
representation, automated reasoning, and the
use of the stored information to answer questions
and draw new conclusions should also be
included. Because of these skills, AI systems will
soon be able to engage in natural language with
people and other machines. The global spread of
research into fresh applications of AI, on the
other hand, has not been hindered by the
absence of a definition that is generally
recognized.
The market for cognitive and AI systems has
been progressively developing over the course of
the previous several years, as seen by the global
expenditure of $24.0 billion on such systems in
2018. According to IDC's 2019 projections, this
investment will reach 77.6 billion dollars in 2022
[7]. Researchers and practitioners of AI will
benefit from having a comprehensive
understanding of what has been explored and
used in a variety of business domains (for
example, manufacturing to services) and in a
variety of disciplinary subjects, such as
marketing, tourism, management, sociology,
psychology, and so on. This is due to the fact
that research on commercial applications of AI
typically requires a perspective that draws from
other disciplines. With the use of such in-depth
knowledge, researchers will be able to prioritize
their study topics, and practitioners will be able to
make prudent investments in essential businessrelated AI aspects [8].
It is interesting to note that several academics
have made an attempt to carry out a
comprehensive literature review on the use of AI
in business. For example, Côrte-Real, Ruivo, and
Oliveira [9] carry out a methodical mapping of the
diffusion stages of business intelligence and
analytics (BI&A) deployment and make a
recommendation for more research in the postadoption stages, which were mostly disregarded
at the time of the study's original publication.
Moro, Cortez, and Rita [10] did a literature study
that focused on business intelligence in banking
between the years 2002 and 2013. Business
intelligence uses AI algorithms for predictive
analysis. Tká and Verner [11,12] noticed,
throughout the course of their analysis of 20
years' worth of research on the use of artificial
neural networks in business, that the majority of
the papers they looked at mentioned expert
systems with applications. This was one of the
findings from their investigation. As a final step,
Duan, Edwards, and Dwivedi [13] conduct an
analysis of relevant papers from the International
Journal of Information Management. Their goal is
to identify issues and challenges connected to
the application of artificial intelligence (AI) for
decision-making in the era of big data, as well as
to provide theoretical advancement and AI
implementation. While these projects do provide
useful information on the latest advancements in
business research and artificial intelligence, the
majority of their focus is on certain applications
(such as BI&A or decision support systems) or
domains. The purpose of this study is to address
this vacuum by providing an overview of the
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
87
present research on artificial intelligence (AI) in
business. This will be accomplished by doing a
comprehensive analysis of the history and stateof-the-art research on AI, as well as by projecting
future trends in order to make useful ideas for
further research on the subject.
1.1 Artificial Intelligence
It is necessary to provide a definition of the word
"artificial intelligence" before analysing the ways
in which AI technologies are influencing the
business sector. The phrase "artificial
intelligence" is a generic one that may be used to
describe any variety of computer software that
participates in tasks that are analogous to those
performed by humans, such as learning,
planning, and problem-solving. To refer to certain
applications as "artificial intelligence" is like to
referring to a car as a "vehicle"; while this is
technically accurate, it does not encompass any
of the nuances of the topic. We need to delve
further if we want to learn which kind of artificial
intelligence is most commonly used in business
[14, 15].
1.1.1 Machine learning
One of the most prevalent forms of artificial
intelligence (AI) currently being developed for
use in business is known as machine learning.
The primary goal of machine learning is to
process vast volumes of data in a relatively short
amount of time. The algorithms that make up
these sorts of artificial intelligences give the
impression that they "learn" over time [16,17]. If
you give an algorithm for machine learning
additional information, the modeling it produces
should get better. The Internet of Things and
linked gadgets are producing ever-increasing
amounts of data, which can be difficult for
humans to comprehend without the assistance of
machine learning [18]. For instance, if you are
the manager of a manufacturing company, the
equipment in your facility is probably connected
to the network. A centralized location receives a
steady flow of information regarding the
functionality, production, and other aspects of an
organization's connected devices. Unfortunately,
there is far too much information for a person to
ever be able to sort through all of it, and even if
they did, it is probable that they would overlook
the majority of the patterns [19]. Machine
learning can detect trends and abnormalities in
real time. A machine-learning system can alert
decision-makers that a manufacturing plant
machine is underperforming and needs
preventative maintenance [20,21]. Machine
learning is vast. Deep learning emerged from
artificial neural networks, a network of artificial
intelligence "nodes" [22].
1.1.2 Deep learning
Deep learning uses neural networks for nonlinear
thinking. Fraud detection requires deep learning.
It does this by analyzing many factors [23]. Selfdriving automobiles must concurrently identify,
analyze, and respond to multiple elements. Deep
learning algorithms assist self-driving cars
contextualize sensor data including object
distance, speed, and 5-10-second predictions. A
self-driving automobile calculates all this
information at once to decide whether to change
lanes [24]. Deep learning is promising in
business and may be utilized increasingly. Deep
learning models advance with additional data,
but older machine-learning algorithms plateau.
Deep learning models are more scalable,
detailed, and independent [25].
Fig. 1. Artificial intelligence
Machine
learning
Deep
learning
Artificial
Intelligence
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
88
1.2 AI in Business
Artificial intelligence supports human intelligence
and inventiveness rather than replacing it. AI can
process and analyze large amounts of data
quicker than a human brain, but it struggles with
basic tasks. Then, AI software may offer
synthesized actions to humans. Thus, AI can
help us predict the outcomes of each action and
simplify decision-making [26,27]. Amir Husain,
creator and CEO of Spark Cognition, called
artificial intelligence the second coming of
software. “It’s software that makes its own
decisions and acts in situations the programmers
didn’t anticipate. AI can make more decisions
than traditional software” [28]. AI is useful in
numerous sectors, from helping visitors and staff
navigate a corporate site to monitoring a wind
turbine to forecast maintenance [29].
2. AI APPLICATIONS IN BUSINESS
There are several uses for artificial intelligence in
business, but most of them are focused on
fostering expansion. Companies are discovering
novel methods to improve company performance
by integrating artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning (ML) [30]. The following is a list
of some of the commercial benefits of AI.
2.1 Machine Learning
Massive data systems employ machine learning.
Smart energy management systems take data
from asset sensors. Machine-learning algorithms
contextualize the data for your company's
decision-makers to better comprehend energy
use and maintenance needs [31].
2.2 Cyber Security
Husain said artificial intelligence is essential for
finding computer network security weaknesses.
AI systems can detect cyber-attacks and other
cyber threats by analyzing data trends. It may
pinpoint the source of a danger in your data and
prevent future threats. Your infrastructure will
benefit from AI's vigilant and constant eyes
[32].“Because of scale and increasing
complexity, you really can’t have enough cyber
security experts to look at these problems,”
Husain said. “AI is becoming more important
here” [33].
2.3 Managing Customers
AI is also revolutionizing CRM systems. Sales
force and Zoho need frequent human updates. AI
turns a CRM system into a self-updating, autocorrecting relationship management system [34].
 Increasing Productivity Through the
Automation of Processes
 Improving either the rate at which service is
provided or its consistency.
 Utilizing information gleaned from customers
as a basis for decision-making
 Discovering new markets for existing and
potential products and services
Fig. 2. AL in business
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
Management Quality
controll
Customer care Cybersecurity Fruad
Detection
% of AL in business
% of AL in business
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
89
The use of AI is compatible with virtually any
business tactic. To get started with AI, it is
essential to first obtain a grasp of how data
collecting and analysis factor into artificial
intelligence. This is because artificial intelligence
relies heavily on data. You will be better
equipped to identify how artificial intelligence
could be able to aid your sector if you examine
the technique underlying AI first. Anyone
interested in learning more about how AI is
revolutionizing the world of business might
consider enrolling in an introductory AI course
such as the one offered by Wharton Online’s
Artificial Intelligence for Business program. This
can be an excellent place to start [35,36].
2.4 Case Studies of Businesses Utilizing
Artificial Intelligence
You may not be aware of how frequently firms
employ AI, but the frequency may surprise you.
The uses of artificial intelligence are virtually
limitless, ranging from marketing to operations to
customer service. The following are some
instances of how artificial intelligence is utilized in
various business settings [37,38].
2.5 Improving One's Service to
Customers
Have you ever gone to a website and were
greeted by a chatbot when you went there?
Customers may have direct interactions with AI
most frequently through chatbots. This type of
interaction is becoming increasingly widespread.
Chatbots make it possible for businesses to
automate many of the procedures involved in
providing customer care and free up staff' time to
focus on problems that call for a higher level of
individualized attention. The ability to
comprehend user requests is often accomplished
by chatbots through a synergy of natural
language processing, machine learning, and
artificial intelligence [39]. Clients can also be sent
to a real-life employee who is better able to
answer their inquiries by using chatbot
technology, which can also aid clients [40].
2.6 Providing Suggestions for Various
Products
AI may be used by businesses to provide product
recommendations to clients that will both satisfy
their needs and keep them interested in what
they have to offer. You can provide clients with
items that are comparable to those that they
have already viewed on your website if you
follow the behavior of your customers on your
website. Companies who operate in the ecommerce market might benefit tremendously
from utilizing this strategy [41]. Streaming
services provide yet another illustration of
personalized suggestions in action. Streaming
platforms are able to keep you on their app for
longer lengths of time by showing you titles that
are similar to the movies and program that you
click on the most frequently. This analysis is
performed by looking at the sorts of movies and
shows that you click on the most [42].
2.7 Segmenting Audiences
In a manner not dissimilar to that of making
product recommendations, advertising
departments may utilize AI to divide consumers
into distinct groups and develop campaigns that
are specifically geared towards those groups.
When working in a field that is known for its high
level of competition, it is of the utmost
importance to present one's work to the
appropriate audience. Companies utilize data to
determine which sorts of people will see which
advertisements in order to make their marketing
initiatives more effective. When it comes to
forecasting how clients would respond to certain
adverts, artificial intelligence comes into play
[43].
2.8 Examining the Level of Happiness of
the Customers
The usage of sentiment analysis, also known as
emotion artificial intelligence (AI), is a strategy
that businesses employ in order to evaluate the
responses of their clients. The use of artificial
intelligence (AI) and machine learning allows
businesses to collect data about how consumers
view their brand. One example of this is the use
of artificial intelligence to comb through reviews,
ratings, and postings on social media platforms
that reference the brand. Companies are able to
find chances for improvement as a result of the
insights that were gathered through this
investigation [44].
2.9 Identifying Fraud
AI may also assist businesses in identifying
potential instances of fraud and devising effective
countermeasures. Utilizing various types of
machine learning algorithms, there are already
accessible solutions in the banking and finance
sector that can identify potentially fraudulent
transactions. The application will prevent the
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
90
transaction from going through if it determines
that there is a potential for fraud and will notify
the relevant parties [45].
2.10 Increasing Efficiency throughout the
Supply Chain Activities
AI could be able to assist your firm if it has
trouble meeting its deadlines for the delivery of
its products on a regular basis. AI-driven
solutions may be of assistance to businesses in
several ways, including anticipating how quickly
items will be able to move through the supply
chain and predicting the cost of materials and
shipping. These kinds of insights provide supply
chain experts with the information they
need to make decisions on the most efficient
manner to distribute their items. On a more
localized basis, artificial intelligence may be
utilized to assist delivery trucks in locating
speedier routes [46].
3. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN
SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT
Over the course of the past several years, the
globe has been inching closer and closer to a
digital future, and the technologies of Industry 4.0
are widely regarded as the wave of the future.
Artificial intelligence (AI) is one of the most
prominent of these technologies (including
blockchain, IoT, cloud computing, and so on)
[47]. AI is defined as the power of computers to
interact with and emulate the capabilities of
people [48]. Blockchain is one of the most
prominent of these technologies. Problems can
be solved more accurately, more quickly, and
with a greater number of inputs when artificial
intelligence is used. AI is not a new subject and it
is not a new academic field of study [49];
however, only recently have technological
developments shown that AI has a vast
set of applications [50]. AI is making
headlines by adapting processes in numerous
diverse areas [51], including supply chain
management (SCM). According to Thow-Yick
and Huu-Phuong [52], artificial intelligence
technology is developing as a competitive
advantage at a time when other aspects of
information technology are moving closer and
closer to the position of a competitive need. In
this regard, many businesses are transitioning
from remote monitoring to control, optimization,
and eventually, sophisticated autonomous AIbased systems in order to increase their
functioning [53]. This move comes as a result of
the growing popularity of AI.
This presence has had an effect on many fields,
such as business research, which has picked up
on the topic, and AI is now researched from a
more holistic perspective [54], with supply chain
management being recognized as one of the
fields that stands to benefit the most from AI
applications. There is a need to investigate the
contribution that AI has made to the area of
supply chain management (SCM), despite the
fact that interest from practitioners and
academics is thus strong [55,56].
4. AI IN MARKETING
Despite the growing interest in AI in the
marketing sector, it is still a young subject with
many untapped research possibilities. Recent
times have seen a number of important
classification attempts for ML and AI applications
in marketing, especially from 2017 forward. For
instance, in a study conducted in collaboration
with Deloitte, Davenport, and Ronanki [57],
projects utilizing AI-based technologies across a
range of business tasks and processes have
been studied, with fascinating findings. According
to the study, Davenport was able to divide AI
applications into three categories: (1) Robotics
and cognitive automation, which uses robotic
process automation to automate back-office
financial and administrative tasks; (2) Cognitive
insights, which uses machine learning algorithms
to find patterns in data and turn them into
knowledge; and (3) Cognitive Engagement,
which uses chat to engage customers and
workers. More widespread classifications based
on marketing strategies, such as segmentation,
targeting, and positioning (STP), and marketing
activities, such as product, price, place, and
promotion (4Ps), are provided by other initiatives
to systematize AI and ML applications in
marketing.
Accordingly, segmentation, targeting, and
positioning are three critical areas where
marketers and managers might benefit from
using AI and ML [58]. Personalized advertising is
an illustration of an ML application in this
framework. By identifying patterns that human
intuition and experience alone would not have
seen, data mining can assist in defining
segments. The four categories of marketing
actions—Product, Price, Place, and Promotion—
are referred to as the marketing 4Ps, or
"marketing mix," which McCarthy first articulated
in 1960. Numerous instances of AI applications
in marketing were analyzed by Jarek and
Mazurek [59], who demonstrated how the
examples reflected the marketing mix.
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
91
Jarek cites hyper-personalization, automated
suggestions, and the creation of new products as
examples of applications for AI in product
activities. Apple Pay, Google Pay, and PayPal
are just a few examples of payment automation
tools that leverage AI technology. Reinforcement
learning algorithms are able to dynamically
modify pricing by taking into consideration
customer preferences, competition activity, and
supply characteristics. Regarding price actions,
IoT can optimize retail operations [60]; frontend
presence can be automated with 24/7 customer
care chatbots [61,62]; and both can be used to
automate frontend presence. Finally, AI
technologies can automate the planning of
advertising media, keyword research, real-time
bidding, and social media targeting in many of
their applications, including social media
marketing, mobile marketing, and search engine
optimization [63]. By combining the marketing
mix discussed above with the various AI
intelligences—mechanical AI, thinking AI, and
feeling AI—Huang and Rust [64] have developed
an intriguing taxonomy of AI applications.
Mechanical AI, the first level of AI intelligence,
automates routine tasks; thinking AI deals with
data processing to produce insights that support
decision-making and contribute to competitive
advantage; and feeling AI engages in a two-way
conversation with people by analyzing their
needs and emotions.
5. AI IN INDUSTRIES
A more flexible version of the definition for
industrial AI offered in [65] is suggested in the
context of this study. Industrial AI may be
characterized in this context as a systematic
discipline that focuses on the creation, validation,
deployment, and maintenance of AI solutions (in
its many forms) for industrial applications with
long-term performance [66]. Therefore, Industrial
AI is a multidisciplinary field of study that
integrates robotics, machine learning, and
natural language processing. Over the past
several years, significant research has been
done on how to integrate and embed these
principles into the current Industry 4.0
manufacturing value chains [67,68]. Combining
these domains gives the system the ability to
adapt and address issues through a certain
amount of autonomous activity within pre-defined
system bounds [69]. Within the topic of AI,
industrial AI stands out in five specific ways:
 Infrastructures: Real-time processing
capabilities are highly prioritized in terms of
hardware and software, guaranteeing
industrial-grade dependability with strict
security standards and interconnection
[70];
 Data: Industrial AI requires data that comes
from a range of units, products, regimes, etc.
and is enormous in volume and fast-moving
[71].
 Algorithms: It necessitates the fusion of
heuristic, digital, and physical knowledge.
high complexity caused by model
deployment, governance, and administration
[72].
 Making decisions: Given the industrial
environment's often low tolerance for
mistake, addressing ambiguity is crucial.
Efficiency is especially crucial for complex
optimization issues [73].
 Objectives: Through a mix of elements like
scrap reduction, higher quality, enhanced
operator performance, or shorter ramp-up
times, industrial AI primarily focuses on
concrete value generation [74].
Fig. 3. The virtuous cycle of Al
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
92
6. APPLICATIONS
Although the field of artificial intelligence (AI) has
been studied academically and scientifically
since the 1950s, the technology has only just
begun to achieve significant traction. The current
boom in AI research, funding, and practical
commercial applications is unparalleled, which
hardly needs to be said. Grand View Research
estimates that at a 38.1% CAGR, the worldwide
AI industry would grow from $136.6 billion in
2022 to $1,811.8 billion by 2030 [75,76].
Applications of AI not only promise to produce
better commercial outcomes but also enhance
overall human experience.
6.1 Health Care
It is crucial for the industry that technological
behemoths like Microsoft, Google, Apple, and
IBM contribute to the healthcare sector. AI is now
being used for a variety of healthcare services,
including medical imaging, medication
management, drug development, robotic surgery,
and data mining for pattern recognition and
subsequently carrying out more precise
diagnosis and treatment of medical disorders
[77-79].
For instance, IBM Watson (an AI tool) may be
used to analyze a patient's medical record to find
prospective treatments after determining the
meaning and context of a combination of
structured and unstructured data that may be
important for choosing a treatment plan. In other
words, IBM Watson behaves like a real physician
[80]. Similar to this, a platform created by the
biopharma business NuMedii called Artificial
Intelligence for Drug Discovery (AIDD) uses big
data and AI to identify the relationship between
illnesses and medications at the systems level
[81-83].
Fig. 4. Applications of AI in industries
Artificial
Intelligenc
e
Health
Sector Agricul
ture
Food
Autom
obile
Gamini
ng
Real
Estate
Retail
transp
ortatio
n
finance
Travel
proper
ty
power
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
93
Fig. 5. Statistics of AI in health
Fig. 6. Applications of ai in health sector
6.2 Retail and Online Shopping
Perhaps the only industry where the majority of
end consumers can see the deployment of AI in
action is retail and e-commerce. Retail
businesses always search for methods to identify
trends in customer behavior in order to better
align their strategy and outwit rivals in this highly
competitive industry [84]. It's safe to say that in
the grand scheme of things, AI has reached its
sweet spot. Your Amazon account's product
suggestions are nothing more than the real-time
use of sophisticated AI algorithms to identify the
goods you are most likely to purchase [85].
Applications of AI are also being employed more
often to improve the consumer experience. For
instance, a lot of the chatbots that can be seen
on e-commerce websites are AI-powered and
built to instantly respond to a variety of frequent
client questions [86].
6.3 Food Science
The food business has benefited from the use of
AI. Have you ever considered a robot making
your tea? Hi Arya, a culinary technology firm, has
created a robotic tea maker in partnership with
LeewayHertz using AI and IoT technologies.
Users of the smart tea maker may develop their
own recipes using the equipment itself, a
smartphone app, and a web interface [87]. In
essence, consumers utilize a web interface,
machine, or smartphone app to order their cup of
tea. When a user placed an order, the tea maker
immediately begins to make it, and the user may
take use of live-feed features to see their tea
being made [88]. In a similar vein, AI
advancement has also impacted the commercial
food processing industry. Taking the market for
French fries, peeled potatoes, and chopped and
ground beef as an example, Tomra Systems
Applications of AL in health sectors
Drig Development
Disease Diagnostics
Health monitoring
Digital Consultation
Surgery
Medical treatment:
50%
10 %
10 %
10 %
10 %
10 %
Robot
Assisted
surgery
Virtual
nursing
assistants
Dossage Error
Detection
Drug
development
Disease
Diagnostics
Analysis of
health plan
Storage and
managing
medical data
Personlized
Medicine
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
94
ASA has created AI-based food sorting
machinery. Food processing businesses may
use Tomra's food processors to automate
operations like gauging the size, shape, and
colour of fries or figuring out how much fat is in a
piece of meat [89, 90]. In the field of agriculture,
Sentient is using AI to study how factors like UV
radiation, salt, heat, and water affect basil. With
the information at hand, they are creating the
procedures for growing the ideal crops [91]. In
the farming industry, where we have witnessed a
rise in the usage of intelligent tractors and
intelligent plucking machines, AI applications
have also been introduced [92].
6.4 Financial and Banking Services
The emergence of AI applications has caused a
significant upheaval in the banking and financial
services sector. There are tons of AI application
cases in this field. In many cases, sophisticated
software robots are replacing human workers to
handle loan applications in milliseconds. Similar
to this, robo-financial advisers quickly sort
through several levels of data to suggest the best
investments for clients [93]. In order to find the
industries and businesses most closely
associated with your long-term requirements and
aspirations, these Robo-advisors can also
analyze your social media activity, emails, and
other personal data [94,95]. In order to enhance
the customer experience and develop insurance
plans and solutions based on consumer data, AIbased chatbots are also being used in the
insurance industry. The processing of claims has
been sped up greatly thanks to the introduction
of AI-based tools, benefiting both customers and
insurance providers [96].
Fraud detection is a crucial use of AI in the
banking industry. For instance, Mastercard
analyses multiple data points to identify
fraudulent transactions using AI-based Decision
Intelligence technology [97].
6.5 Transportation and Logistics
The logistics and transportation sector is about to
undergo a transformation powered by AI. Supply
chain management has already undergone
significant change and become a smooth
operation thanks to the application of machine
learning and predictive analytics. Robots with AI
capabilities are widely used in warehouses to
sort and package merchandise. The fastest
shipping route and last-mile delivery are two
more tasks that are increasingly supported by AI
algorithms [98,99]. Self-driving cars will surely be
the next big thing in the transportation sector.
Artificial intelligence-based self-driving vehicles
have the potential to replace manual driving and
improve road safety, even if they are still in the
research and testing stages in many nations. The
leaders in this research are Tesla, Uber, Volvo,
and Volkswagen [100]. Research is also being
done on how AI algorithms may be used to
schedule, route, and even operate traffic lights
for public transportation [101].
Fig. 7. Rise of Al technologies in Food industry
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
2010 2014 2016 2018 2020 2023
% rise of AL in food industry by year
% rise of AL in food industry by year
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
95
6.6 Travel
The adoption of AI-enabled chatbots is expected
to have a substantial positive impact on the travel
sector. Because they are available around-theclock and provide prompt answers to questions,
chatbots have been shown to be an effective
way to increase customer satisfaction and
engagement [102]. Chatbots are being powered
by increasingly effective AI algorithms, enabling
them to respond to client inquiries with more
accuracy. In order to create their own AI-based
mobile applications and chatbots for enhancing
the client experience, several sizable travel
organizations are turning to AI businesses [103].
Furthermore, by recognizing client behavior and
purchase trends, machine learning and predictive
analytics assist travel firms in increasing their
conversion rates [104].
6.7 Property
AI's use in the real estate sector is creating new
opportunities for brokers, clients, and agents
alike. Brokers are becoming more strategic,
clients are feeling more in control, and agents
are becoming more productive and efficient.
Brokers and agents may assist clients wanting to
purchase, rent, or sell a property discover the
ideal match with the use of AI-powered bots
[105,106]. The real estate sector may use AI in
the following ways.
 Artificial intelligence may be used by real
estate experts to analyze market
circumstances, property valuations, and
other factors to identify trends and
investment possibilities [107].
 Lease agreements, mortgages, and title
deeds may all be handled and processed
automatically using artificial intelligence
[108].
 Rental revenue, property values, and other
factors impacting the real estate market may
all be predicted using AI's predictive
modelling component.
 AI may be combined with smart home
technologies, such as thermostats and
security systems, to improve security and
energy efficiency.Additionally, AI-based
chatbots may work around-the-clock to assist
users of real estate websites in finding the
answers to their questions [109].
6.8 Gaming and Entertainment
Entering the entertainment sector, AI is assisting
broadcasters and program makers in determining
which shows or program they should suggest to
certain consumers based on their behavior. It
enables companies like Netflix and Amazon to
provide people a more individualized experience
[110]. Machine learning algorithms are frequently
used to analyze user behavior, and these
algorithms are getting smarter over time to the
point where they can now tell whether a user is
buying something for themselves or as a gift, or
whether different family members have different
viewing preferences [111]. Artificial intelligence
(AI) is being used in the film business to improve
digital effects, reduce costs, and hasten pre- and
post-production. For instance, data is utilized to
determine the best timetable for filming, or
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is used to
organize a screenplay for storyboarding [112].
Large organizations in the music sector, such
Apple and Spotify, employ AI to comprehend
user interaction patterns and provide the
appropriate music to the appropriate listeners at
the appropriate moment. The AI-driven computer
accompaniment technique in music creation
enables a machine to create music in real-time in
reaction to a live musician's performance [113].
One of the first industries to embrace AI was the
gaming sector, and it has had a significant
influence on user experience. AI is utilized in
gaming for a variety of purposes, including
directing the behavior of non-player characters
(NPCs) who are important in moving the plot
along. The gaming experience of such
characters is significantly improved by AI-driven
behavior modeling [114].
6.9 Production
There is no question that the industrial sector is
setting the pace for the use and acceptance of AI
technologies. AI is being used in manufacturing
at all levels and lines of operations, from labor
planning to product design, enhancing
productivity, product quality, and worker safety
[115]. Machine learning and artificial neural
networks are used in factories to enable
predictive maintenance of essential industrial
equipment that can foresee asset failure
accurately. It enables management to take
prompt action to repair the equipment and avoid
expensive unscheduled downtime [116]. Robots
play a crucial role in the manufacturing process.
Most industrial robots remain immobile most of
the time, yet they still run the risk of colliding with
neighboring things. The use of AI to robotics has
ushered in the idea of collaborative robots,
sometimes known as "cobots," which can follow
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
96
orders from people and collaborate effectively
with them.
AI algorithms are being utilized in quality control
to alert manufacturing facilities to potential
production errors that might affect the quality of
the final product. Process variations, minor
machine behavior abnormalities, changes in raw
materials, and other errors are examples of
faults. As AI advances, it is progressively
assuming the role as the single most important
factor behind the evolution of technology. We live
in a time when computers are beginning to
comprehend human behavior and make
predictions about it. It has opened up a world of
opportunities, and what we have seen so far and
what we could predict for the future just scratch
the surface of AI's full potential. The industries
that will have the fastest growth in AI investment
over the next five years are those in healthcare,
pharmaceutical research, retail, marketing,
finance, and intelligent process automation
[117,118].
6.10 Automotive
The automotive sector might benefit from the use
of AI in a number of ways, including self-driving
cars, driver support systems, and traffic
prediction to increase safety and decrease traffic
congestion. It may be used to power autonomous
vehicles, assisting them in making deft
judgements, navigating through traffic, and
dodging hazards. Artificial intelligence may be
used to improve driver assistance systems like
adaptive cruise control, lane departure warning,
and automated emergency braking. These
systems monitor and account for traffic
conditions using cameras, radar, and other
sensors, making driving safer and more effective
[119]. To improve traffic flow and lessen
congestion on the roads, artificial intelligence
may be used to update traffic lights, signage, and
other infrastructure in response to changes in
traffic conditions. AI is able to predict
when maintenance will be required, even
when a component may break, by analyzing data
from automobiles. Automakers and fleet
operators may cut costs and downtime by
planning maintenance before a problem arises
[120].
6.11 Power
AI is being used in the energy sector to increase
energy efficiency and reduce costs in areas
including energy management, demand
forecasting, and the integration of renewable
Fig. 8. L in automotives [121]
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
97
Fig. 9. AI in generating smart energy power [124]
energy sources. In order to determine how
frequently maintenance should be performed,
data from energy infrastructure, such as
transmission lines and power plants, can be
examined. This enables businesses that produce
energy to schedule repair before a problem
arises, cutting costs and downtime [122]. The
power grid may be made more efficient with the
use of artificial intelligence by analyzing data on
energy supply and demand and changing power
plant output accordingly. Artificial intelligence
may be used in buildings and other facilities to
analyze energy consumption data and find ways
to increase energy efficiency, such as by altering
lighting, heating and cooling systems, and other
equipment. In addition, the energy sector may
apply AI algorithms to spot dishonest behavior
like meter tampering and billing mistakes
[121,123].
7. CONCLUSIONS
Artificial intelligence (AI) is now driving a
revolution in business, as well as in the economy
and society as a whole. This revolution is being
driven by AI's ability to change the interactions
and connections that already exist between
stakeholders and individuals. It is conceivable to
trace the roots of artificial intelligence back to the
mythology of ancient Chinese, Greek, and other
civilizations. Other cultures' mythologies may
also hold clues. It was believed, according to
these myths, that automatons have genuine
minds and were able to think for themselves and
experience emotions. Because of this, artificial
intelligence came into being. This is where the
concept that would eventually develop into what
is now known as artificial intelligence first
emerged. Many companiespractices now have
the potential to be improved by the formation of
new forms of collaboration, which is a
considerable advantage over other organizations
as a result of the ongoing evolution of business
as well as the most recent breakthroughs in
artificial intelligence (AI). In addition, this
advantage is made possible by the most recent
advancements in artificial intelligence (AI).
Because of the rapid advancement of
technology, it is now feasible to offer branded
services and even to experiment with new forms
of corporate contact with both consumers and
staff. The digitalization of AI has simultaneously
brought to the notice of businesses the demand
for those businesses to focus on their present
strategies while also regularly and quickly
investigating new prospects in the market. This is
a necessity that these businesses must fulfil in
order to remain competitive. The use of AI
techniques has not only altered the corporate
world but also a wide range of other industrial
sectors as well. The major focus of this review is
on the application of AI approaches to a wide
variety of subfields within the business and
economics sectors.
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
98
COMPETING INTERESTS
Authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
REFERENCES
1. Nilsson NJ. The quest for artificial
intelligence. Cambridge University Press;
2009.
2. Nahodil P, Vıtku J. How to design an
autonomous creature based on original
artificial life approaches. Beyond Artif Intell
Author’s Part. 2012;40:161-80.
3. Cath C. Governing artificial intelligence:
ethical, legal and technical opportunities
and challenges. Philos Trans A Math Phys
Eng Sci. 2018;376(2133):20180080.
4. Russell SJ. Artificial intelligence a modern
approach. Pearson Education, Inc; 2010.
5. Huang M-H, Rust RT. Artificial intelligence
in service. J Serv Res. 2018;21(2):155-72.
6. Moro S, Cortez P, Rita P. Business
intelligence in banking: A literature analysis
from 2002 to 2013 using text mining and
latent Dirichlet allocation. Expert Syst Appl.
2015;42(3):1314-24.
7. Tkáč M, Verner R. Artificial neural
networks in business: Two decades of
research. Appl Soft Comput. 2016;38:788-
804.
8. Duan Y, Edwards JS, Dwivedi YK. Artificial
intelligence for decision making in the era
of Big Data–evolution, challenges and
research agenda. Int J Inf Manag. 2019;
48:63-71.
9. Cortez P, Moro S, Rita P, King D, Hall J.
Insights from a text mining survey on
Expert Systems research from 2000 to
2016. Expert Syst. 2018;35(3):e12280.
10. Loureiro SMC, Guerreiro J, Eloy S,
Langaro D, Panchapakesan P.
Understanding the use of Virtual Reality in
Marketing: A text mining-based review. J
Bus Res. 2019;100:514-30.
11. Moro S, Rita P, Cortez P. A text mining
approach to analyzing Annals literature. A
text mining approach to analyzing, 2017;
208-10.
12. Goralski M, Górniak-Kocikowska K.
Globalization, codification, automation, and
artificial intelligence: Job affectation. In:.
Presented at the academy of
international business–US–NE conference.
Philadelphia: Temple University; 2017.
13. Goralski M, O’Connor M. Artificial
intelligence, open cog, and blockchain. In:
Presented at the academy of
International business–US–NE conference.
Philadelphia: Drexel University; 2018.
14. Boullart L. A gentle introduction to artificial
intelligence. Appl Artif Intell Process
Control. 1992:5-40.
15. Cbinsights. Understanding Tech Company
Health and Predicting Future Success;
2020. Available: http://www.cbinsights.com
16. HBR. November. V. Kolbjørnsrud, R.
Amico, and R. J. Thomas. How artificial
intelligence will redefine management.
Harvard Business Review; 2016.
17. Neiger C. 5 reasons why investors should
believe the artificial intelligence hype;
2019.
Available:https://www.fool.com/investing/2
019/04/13/reasons-investors-believeartificial-intelligence.aspx
18. Raygun. Developers are building better
software, faster, using AI; 2017.
Available:https://thenextweb.com/dd/2017/
09/19/developers-are-building-bettersoftware-faster-using-ai
19. Ertel W. Introduction to artificial
intelligence. Springer; 2018.
20. Shani A. From science fiction to reality:
The evolution of artificial intelligence.
Wired; 2015.
21. Abbasi A, Sarker S, Chiang RH. Big data
research in information systems: Toward
an inclusive research agenda. J Assoc Inf
Syst. 2016;17(2):1-32.
22. Afiouni R. Organizational learning in the
rise of machine learning. International
Conference on Information Systems,
Munich, Germany; 2019.
23. Alsheibani S, Cheung Y, Messom C,
Alhosni M. Winning AI strategy: six-steps
to create value from artificial intelligence.
Americas Conference on Information
Systems, Online; 2020.
24. AlSheibani S, Messom C, Cheung Y. Rethinking the competitive landscape of
artificial intelligence. Proceedings of the
Annual Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences. Proceedings of the 53rd
Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences; 2020.
25. Alsheibani S, Messom D, Cheung Y,
Alhosni M. Reimagining the strategic
management of artificial intelligence: five
recommendations for business leaders.
Americas Conference on Information
Systems, Online; 2020.
26. Anon. AI is essential to India’s future of
work, study finds. M2 Presswire; 2020.
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
99
27. Baby CJ, Khan FA, Swathi J. Home
automation using IoT and a chatbot using
natural language processing. 2017
innovations in power and advanced
computing technologies (i-PACT); 2017.
28. Baier L, Jöhren F, Seebacher S.
Challenges in the deployment and
operation of machine learning in practice.
In: Proceedings of the 27th European
conference on information systems (ECIS),
Stockholm, Sweden; 2019.
29. Balasundaram S, Venkatagiri S. A
structured approach to implementing
Robotic Process Automation in HR. J Phys
Conf S. 2020;1427(1):012008.
30. Bauer W, Vocke C. Work in the age of
artificial intelligence–challenges and
potentials for the design of new forms of
human-machine interaction. International
Conference on Applied Human Factors
and Ergonomics; 2019.
31. Borges AFS, Laurindo FJB, Spínola MM,
Gonçalves RF, Mattos CA. The strategic
use of artificial intelligence in the digital
era: Systematic literature review and future
research directions. Int J Inf Manag.
2021;57:102225.
32. Bytniewski A, Matouk K, ChojnackaKomorowska A, Hernes M, Zawadzki A,
Kozina A. The functionalities of cognitive
technology in management control system.
Asian Conference on Intelligent
Information and Database Systems; 2020.
33. Castillo D, Canhoto AI, Said E. The dark
side of AI-powered service interactions:
Exploring the process of co-destruction
from the customer perspective. Serv Ind J.
2020:1-26.
34. Coombs C, Hislop D, Taneva SK, Barnard
S. The strategic impacts of Intelligent
Automation for knowledge and service
work: an interdisciplinary review. J Strateg
Inf Syst. 2020;29(4):101600.
35. Dastin J. Amazon scraps secret AI
recruiting tool that showed bias against
women. Reuters. Retrieved 15/06; 2018.
Available:https://www.reuters.com/article/u
s-amazon-com-jobs-automationinsight/amazon-scraps-secret-ai-recruitingtool-that-showed-bias-against-womenidUSKCN1MK08G
36. Davenport TH, Ronanki R. Artificial
intelligence for the real world. Harv Bus
Rev. 2018;96(1):108-16.
37. Dellermann D, Lipusch N, Ebel P, Popp
KM, Leimeister JM. Finding the unicorn:
Predicting early stage startup success
through a hybrid intelligence method.
SSRN Journal. International Conference
on Information Systems (ICIS), Seoul,
South Korea; 2017.
38. Demlehner Q, Laumer S. Shall we use it or
not? Explaining the adoption of artificial
intelligence for car manufacturing purposes
in Proceedings of the 28th European
Conference on Information Systems
(ECIS); 2020.
39. Engler A. Auditing employment algorithms
for discrimination. Retrieved 15/06; 2021.
Available:https://www.brookings.edu/resea
rch/auditing-employment-algorithms-fordiscrimination
40. Eriksson T, Bigi A, Bonera M. Think with
me, or think for me? On the future role of
artificial intelligence in marketing strategy
formulation. TQM J. 2020;32(4):795-814.
doi: 10.1108/TQM-12-2019-0303.
41. European Commission. Ethics guidelines
for trustworthy AI; 2019a [cited Apr 23
2021].
Available:https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/d
ae/document.cfm?doc_id=60419
42. European Commission. Proposal for a
Regulation laying down harmonised rules
on artificial intelligence. Retrieved 15/06;
2019.
Available: https://digital-strategy.ec.
europa.eu/en/library/proposal-regulationlaying-down-harmonised-rules-artificialintelligence.
43. Geva M, Goldberg Y, Berant J. Are we
modeling the task or the annotator? an
investigation of annotator bias in natural
language understanding datasets; 2019.
Available:arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.07898
44. Ghadage YH, Shelke SD International
Conference on Communication and Signal
Processing (ICCSP). Speech to text
conversion for multilingual languages;
2016.
45. Glauner P. Unlocking the power of artificial
intelligence for your business. In:
Innovative technologies for market
leadership. Future of business and finance.
Springer International Publishing. 2020;
45-59.
46. Higgins JP. Cochrane Handbook for
Systematic Reviews of Interventions
Version 5.0. 1. The Cochrane
Collaboration; 2008.
Available: https://www.cochranehandbook.org
47. Jelonek D, Mesjasz-Lech A, Stępniak C,
Turek T, Ziora L. The artificial intelligence
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
100
application in the management of
contemporary organization: theoretical
assumptions, current practices and
research review. Future of Information and
Communication Conference; 2019.
48. Kawaguchi K, Kaelbling LP, Bengio Y.
Generalization in deep learning. arXiv
preprint; 2017. arXiv:1710.05468.
49. Kirchmer M, Franz P. Value-driven robotic
process automation (RPA). International
Symposium on Business Modeling and
Software Design; 2019.
50. Kitchenham B. Procedures for performing
systematic reviews. Keele University;
2004.
51. LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G. Deep
learning. Nature. 2015;521(7553):436-44.
52. Marcondes FS, Almeida JJ, Novais P. A
short survey on chatbot technology: Failure
in raising the state of the art. International
Symposium on Distributed Computing and
Artificial Intelligence; 2019.
53. Marcus G, Davis E. Rebooting AI: building
artificial intelligence we can trust Vintage;
2019.
54. Matei AM, Iftene A. Smart home
automation through voice interaction
RoCHI; 2019.
55. Nambisan S, Lyytinen K, Yoo Y. Handbook
of digital innovation Edward Elgar
Publishing; 2020.
56. Netflix; 2020. Machine Learning [cited
2020-12-3].
Available:https://research.netflix.com/resea
rch-area/machinelearning
57. Ntoutsi E, Fafalios P, Gadiraju U, Iosifidis
V, Nejdl W, Vidal ME et al. Bias in datadriven artificial intelligence systems—An
introductory survey. Wiley Interdiscip Rev
Data Min Knowl Discov. 2020;10(3):e1356.
58. Nuruzzaman M, Hussain OK. A survey on
chatbot implementation in customer
service industry through deep neural
networks 15th International Conference on
e-Business Engineering (ICEBE). IEEE
Publications; 2018.
59. Papagiannidis E, Mikalef P, Krogstie J.
Structuring AI resources to build an AI
capability: A conceptual framework.
European Conference on Information
Systems, Marrakesh, Morocco; 2021.
60. Pellikka J, Ali-Vehmas T. Managing
innovation ecosystems to create and
capture value in ICT industries. Technol
Innov Manag [review]. 2016;6(10):17-24.
61. Prentice C, Lopes D, Wang XS. The
impact of artificial intelligence and
employee service quality on customer
satisfaction and loyalty. J Hosp Mark
Manag. 2020;29(7):739-56.
62. Pumplun L, Tauchert C, Heidt M. A new
organizational chassis for artificial
intelligence-exploring organizational
readiness factors. In: Proceedings of the
27th European conference on info
rmation systems (ECIS), Stockholm &
Uppsala, Sweden; 2019.
63. Quinio B, Harfouche A, Skandrani
SR, Marciniak R. A framework for
artificial knowledge creation in
organizations. International Conference on
Information Systems, Seoul, South Korea;
2017.
64. Ransbotham S, Kiron D, Gerbert P,
Reeves M. Reshaping business with
artificial intelligence: closing the gap
between ambition and action. MIT Sloan
Manag Rev. 2017;59(1).
65. Ransbotham S, Gerbert P, Reeves M,
Kiron D, Spira M. Artificial intelligence in
business gets real. MIT Sloan Manag Rev;
2018.
66. Riikkinen M, Saarijärvi H, Sarlin P,
Lähteenmäki I. Using artificial intelligence
to create value in insurance. Int J Bank
Mark. 2018;36(6):1145-68.
67. Schaefer C, Lemmer K, Samy Kret K,
Ylinen M, Mikalef P, Niehaves B. Truth or
dare?–How can we Influence the Adoption
of Artificial Intelligence in Municipalities?
In: Proceedings of the 54th Hawaii
international conference on system
sciences; 2021.
68. Schmidt R, Zimmermann A, Moehring M,
Keller B. Value creation in connectionist
artificial intelligence–A research agenda;
2020.
69. Shollo A, Aanestad M, Lyytinen K, Mahring
M, Nielsen PA, Sørensen C. Panel 4: a
Nordic sociotechnical perspective on
artificial intelligence phenomena.
Proceedings of the 28th European
conference on information systems (ECIS):
A Virtual AIS Conference; 2020.
70. Vigdor N. Apple card investigated after
gender discrimination complaints. The New
York Times. Retrieved 15/06.
Available:https://www.nytimes.com/2019/1
1/10/business/Apple-credit-cardinvestigation.html; 2019.
71. Wamba-Taguimdje S, Fosso Wamba S,
Kala Kamdjoug JR, Tchatchouang Wanko
CE. Influence of artificial intelligence (AI)
on firm performance: the business value of
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
101
AI-based transformation projects. Bus
Process Manag J. 2020;26(7):1893-924.
72. Wang H, Huang J, Zhang Z. The impact of
deep learning on organizational agility. In
proceedings of the 40th International
Conference on Information Systems (ICIS),
Munich, Germany; 2019.
73. Wanner J, Herm LV, Heinrich K, Janiesch
C, Zschech P. White, grey, black: effects of
XAI augmentation on the confidence in AIbased. Decis Support Syst; 2020.
74. Welling M. Artificial intelligence versus
intelligence engineering. Harv Data Sci
Rev. 2019;1(1).
75. Dwivedi YK, Hughes L, Ismagilova E, Aarts
G, Coombs C, Crick T et al. Artificial
intelligence (AI): multidisciplinary
perspectives on emerging challenges,
opportunities, and agenda for research,
practice and policy. Int J Inf Manag.
2021;57:101994.
76. Acemoglu D, Restrepo P. The race
between man and machine: Implications of
technology for growth, factor shares, and
employment. Am Econ Rev. 2018;108(6):
1488-542.
77. Alsheibani S, Cheung Y, Messom C.
Artificial intelligence adoption: AI-readiness
at firm-level. Artif Intell. 2018;6.
78. Amer-Yahia S, Basu Roy S, Chen L,
Morishima A, Abello Monedero J, Bourhis
P, et al. Making AI machines work for
humans in FoW. SIGMOD Rec.
2020;49(2):30-5.
79. Bharadiya JP, Tzenios NT, Reddy M.
Forecasting of crop yield using remote
sensing data, agrarian factors and
machine learning approaches. J Eng Res
Rep. 2023;24(12):29-44.
80. Arrieta AB, et al. Explainable Artificial
Intelligence (XAI): Concepts, taxonomies,
opportunities and challenges toward
responsible AI. Inf Fusion. 2020;58.
81. Benbya H, et al. Complexity and
information systems research in the
emerging digital world. MIS Q. 2020;44.
82. Beyer M, Laney D. The importance of ”Big
Data”: a definition. Gartner; 2012.
83. Nallamothu PT, Bharadiya JP. Artificial
intelligence in orthopedics: A concise
review. Asian Journal of Orthopaedic
Research. 2023;6(1):17-27.
84. Chen J, Tao Y, Wang H, Chen T. Big data
based fraud risk management at AliBaba. J
Fin Data Sci. 2015;1(1):1-10.
85. Chakravorty SS, Dulaney RE, Franza RM.
ERP implementation failures: A case study
and analysis. Int J Bus Inf Syst.
2016;21(4).
86. Cirillo D, Catuara-Solarz S, Morey C,
Guney E, Subirats L, Mellino S, et al. Sex
and gender differences and biases in
artificial intelligence for biomedicine and
healthcare. NPJ Digit Med. 2020;3:81.
87. Collins C, Dennehy D, Conboy K, Mikalef
P. Artificial intelligence in information
systems research: A systematic literature
review and research agenda. Int J Inf
Manag. 2021;60.
88. Damper RI, Marchand Y, Adamson MJ,
Gustafson K. Evaluating the pronunciation
component of text-to-speech systems for
English: A performance comparison of
different approaches. Comput Speech
Lang. 1999;13(2):155-76.
89. Dedrick J, Kraemer KL, Shih E. Information
technology and productivity in developed
and developing countries. J Manag Inf
Syst. 2013;30(1):97-122.
90. Duan Y, Edwards JS, Dwivedi YK. Artificial
intelligence for decision making in the era
of Big Data–evolution, challenges and
research agenda. Int J Inf Manag.
2019;48:63-71.
91. Eccles RG, Newquist SC, Schatz R.
Reputation and its risks. Harv Bus Rev.
2007;85(2). PMID 17345684.
92. Ehret M, Wirtz J. Unlocking value from
machines: business models and the
industrial internet of things. J Mark Manag.
2017;33(1-2):111-30.
93. Felzmann H, Villaronga EF, Lutz C, TamòLarrieux A. Transparency you can trust:
transparency requirements for artificial
intelligence between legal norms and
contextual concerns. Big Data Soc.
2019;6(1).
94. Finch G, Goehring B, Marshall A. The
enticing promise of cognitive computing:
high-value functional efficiencies and
innovative enterprise capabilities. Strategy
Leadersh. 2017;45(6):26-33.
95. Fountaine T, McCarthy B, Saleh T.
Building the AI-powered organization. Harv
Bus Rev. 2019;97.
96. Galloway C, Swiatek L. Public relations
and artificial intelligence: it’s not (just)
about robots. Public Relat Rev.
2018;44(5):734-40.
97. Gregory RW, Henfridsson O, Kaganer E,
Kyriakou H. The role of artificial
intelligence and data network effects for
creating user value. Acad Manag Rev(ja).
2021;46(3):534-51.
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
102
98. Holton R, Boyd R. Where are the people?
What are they doing? Why are they doing
it? (Mindell) Situating artificial intelligence
within a socio-technical framework. J
Sociol. 2019;57.
99. Huang MH, Rust R, Maksimovic V. The
feeling economy: Managing in the next
generation of artificial intelligence (AI).
Calif Manag Rev. 2019;61(4):43-65.
100. Jarrahi MH. Artificial intelligence and the
future of work: human-AI symbiosis in
organizational decision making. Bus Horiz.
2018;61(4):577-86.
101. Keding C. Understanding the interplay of
artificial intelligence and strategic
management: four decades of research in
review. Manag Rev Q. 2021;71(1):91-134.
102. Kolbjørnsrud V, Amico R, Thomas RJ.
Partnering with AI: how organizations can
win over skeptical managers. Strategy
Leadersh. 2017;45(1):37-43.
103. Koutsoukis NS, Mitra G. Decision
modelling and information systems: the
information value chain. Business Media;
2003.
104. Lee J, Suh T, Roy D, Baucus M. Emerging
technology and business model innovation:
The case of artificial intelligence. J Open
Innov Technol Mark Complexity. 2019;
5(3).
105. Lichtenthaler U. An intelligence-based view
of firm performance: Profiting from artificial
intelligence. J Innov Manag. 2019;7(1):7-
20.
106. Loyola-Gonzalez O. Black-box vs. whitebox: understanding their advantages and
weaknesses from a practical point of view.
IEEE Access. 2019;7:154096-113.
107. Makarius EE, Mukherjee D, Fox JD, Fox
AK. Rising with the machines: A
sociotechnical framework for bringing
artificial intelligence into the organization. J
Bus Res. 2020;120:262-73.
108. Mikalef P, Gupta M. Artificial Intelligence
Capability: conceptualization,
measurement calibration, and empirical
study on its impact on organizational
creativity and firm performance. Inf Manag.
2021;58(3).
109. Mikalef P, Pappas IO, Krogstie J,
Giannakos M. Big data analytics
capabilities: a systematic literature review
and research agenda. Inf Syst e-Business
Manag. 2018;16(3):547-78.
110. Mishra AN, Pani AK. Business value
appropriation roadmap for artificial
intelligence. VINE J Inf Knowl Manag Syst.
2021;51(3):353-68.
111. Moher D, Shamseer L, Clarke M, Ghersi D,
Liberati A, Petticrew M, et al. Preferred
reporting items for systematic review and
meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015
statement. Syst Rev. 2015;4(1):1.
112. Nambisan S, Lyytinen K, Majchrzak A,
Song M. Digital Innovation Management:
Reinventing innovation management
research in a digital world. MIS Q.
2017;41(1):223-38.
113. Plastino E, Purdy M. Game changing value
from Artificial Intelligence: eight strategies.
Strategy Leadersh. 2018;46(1):16-22.
114. Rajput S, Singh SP. Connecting circular
economy and industry 4.0. Int J Inf Manag.
2019;49:98-113.
115. Samek W, Müller KR. Towards explainable
artificial intelligence. In: Explainable ai:
interpreting, explaining and visualizing
deep learning. Springer; 2019:5-22.
116. Shrestha YR, Ben-Menahem SM, von
Krogh G. Organizational decision-making
structures in the age of artificial
intelligence. Calif Manag Rev.
2019;61(4):66-83.
117. Tallon PP, Pinsonneault A. Competing
perspectives on the link between strategic
information technology alignment and
organizational agility: insights from a
mediation model. MIS Q. 2011;35(2).
118. Templier M, Paré G. A framework for
guiding and evaluating literature reviews.
Commun Assoc Inf Syst. 2015;37.
119. Toniolo K, Masiero E, Massaro M, Bagnoli
C. Sustainable business models and
artificial intelligence: opportunities and
challenges. In: Knowledge, people, and
digital transformation. Springer; 2020:
103-17.
120. Yang W, Meyer KE. How does ownership
influence business growth? A competitive
dynamics perspective. Int Bus Rev.
2019;28(5).
121. Zuiderveen Borgesius FJ. Strengthening
legal protection against discrimination
by algorithms and artificial intelligence.
Int J Hum Rights. 2020;24(10):
1572-93.
122. Yudkowsky E. Artificial intelligence as a
positive and negative factor in global risk.
Glob Catastrophic Risks. 2008;1.
123. Zheng N, Liu Z, Ren P, Ma Y, Chen S, Yu
S, et al. Hybrid-augmented intelligence:
collaboration and cognition. Frontiers
Bharadiya et al.; J. Eng. Res. Rep., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 85-103, 2023; Article no.JERR.100807
103
Inf Technol Electronic Eng. 2017;18(2):
153-79.
124. Cheng L, Yu T. A new generation of AI: A
review and perspective on machine
learning technologies applied to smart
energy and electric power
systems. Int J Energy Res. 2019;43
(6):1928-73.
© 2023 Bharadiya et al.; This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Peer-review history:
The peer review history for this paper can be accessed here:
https://www.sdiarticle5.com/review-history/100807 