THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE ON
PRODUCTIVITY,
DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH
KEY MECHANISMS, INITIAL
EVIDENCE AND POLICY
CHALLENGES
OECD ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE PAPERS
April 2024 No. 15
 1
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
OECD Artificial Intelligence Papers
The impact of Artificial Intelligence on
productivity, distribution and growth: Key
mechanisms, initial evidence and policy
challenges
Francesco Filippucci, Peter Gal, Cecilia Jona-Lasinio, Alvaro Leandro, Giuseppe Nicoletti*
April 2024
*Francesco Filippucci (francesco.filippucci@oecd.org), Peter Gal (peter.gal@oecd.org) and Alvaro Leandro
(alvaro.leandro@oecd.org) are from the OECD’s Economics Department, Giuseppe Nicoletti
(nicolettigiuseppe4@gmail.com) is from LUISS Lab of European Economics, Rome, and Cecilia Jona-Lasinio
(cjonalasinio@luiss.it) is from LUISS Business School, Rome.
Acknowledgements: the authors are grateful to Clare Lombardelli, Alvaro Pereira, Luiz De Mello, Alain De Serres,
Isabelle Koske, Tomasz Kozluk and Filiz Unsal for their guidance throughout various stages of the work and David
Turner, Claudia Ramirez Bulos, Sean Dougherty, Luca Marcolin, Cristiana Vitale, Sebastien Turban, Manuel Betin,
Maria Paula Caldas, Philip Hanspach (from the Economics Department of the OECD), Jens Lundsgaard, Audrey
Plonk, Karine Perset, Luis Aranda, Celine Caira, Flavio Calvino, Gallia Daor (from the Science, Technology and
Innovation Directorate of the OECD), Stijn Broecke, Alexandre Georgieff, Andrew Green, Marguerita Lane, Julie
Lassebie (from the Employment, Labour and Social Affairs Directorate of the OECD), Richard May, Iota Nassr
(from the Directorate for Financial and Enterprise Affairs) and delegates to the Working Party 1 of the Economic
Policy Committee for suggestions, comments and discussions on previous versions of the paper. The authors also
thank Dacil Kurzweg, Sarah Michelson-Sarfati and Pilar Philip for excellent editorial support. The paper has been
developed within the Joint OECD-Italy’s Department of Treasury Project for Multilateral Policy Support. All
remaining errors are of the authors.
PUBE
2 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
OECD Working Papers should not be reported as representing the official views of the OECD or of its
member countries. The opinions expressed and arguments employed are those of the authors.
Working Papers describe preliminary results or research in progress by the author(s) and are published to
stimulate discussion on a broad range of issues on which the OECD works. Comments on Working Papers
are welcomed, and may be sent to eco.contact@oecd.org.
This document and any map included herein are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any
territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city
or area.
The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli authorities.
The use of such data by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem
and Israeli settlements in the West Bank under the terms of international law.
© OECD 2024
The use of this work, whether digital or print, is governed by the Terms and Conditions to be found at
www.oecd.org/termsandconditions
 3
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
The impact of Artificial Intelligence on productivity, distribution and growth:
Key mechanisms, initial evidence and policy challenges
Abstract
This paper explores the economics of Artificial Intelligence (AI), focusing on its potential as a new General-Purpose
Technology that can significantly influence economic productivity and societal wellbeing. It examines AI's unique
capacity for autonomy and self-improvement, which could accelerate innovation and potentially revive sluggish
productivity growth across various industries, while also acknowledging the uncertainties surrounding AI's long-term
productivity impacts. The paper discusses the concentration of AI development in big tech firms, uneven adoption
rates, and broader societal challenges such as inequality, discrimination, and security risks. It calls for a
comprehensive policy approach to ensure AI's beneficial development and diffusion, including measures to promote
competition, enhance accessibility, and address job displacement and inequality.
JEL classification codes: O4, D4, L8, O15
Keywords: Artificial Intelligence, productivity, competition, inequality
L'impact de l'Intelligence Artificielle sur la productivité, la répartition et la croissance :
Mécanismes clés, premières preuves et défis politiques
Résumé
Cet article explore l'économie de l'Intelligence Artificielle (IA), en se concentrant sur son potentiel en tant que nouvelle
Technologie Générale d'Utilité qui peut influencer de manière significative la productivité économique et le bien-être
sociétal. Il examine la capacité unique de l'IA pour l'autonomie et l'auto-amélioration, qui pourrait accélérer l'innovation
et potentiellement revitaliser la croissance de la productivité languissante à travers diverses industries, tout en
reconnaissant également les incertitudes entourant les impacts de l'IA sur la productivité à long terme. L'article discute
de la concentration du développement de l'IA dans les grandes entreprises technologiques, des taux d'adoption
inégaux, et des défis sociétaux plus larges tels que l'inégalité, la discrimination, et les risques de sécurité. Il appelle à
une approche politique complète pour assurer un développement et une diffusion bénéfiques de l'IA, incluant des
mesures pour promouvoir la concurrence, améliorer l'accessibilité, et adresser le déplacement d'emplois et l'inégalité.
Classification JEL: O4, D4, L8, O15
Mots-clés : Intelligence Artificielle, productivité, concurrence, inégalité
4 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Table of contents
1. Introduction 7
2. What is AI and what does it do? An economic view 8
3. Early micro level evidence: AI can yield substantial performance gains 15
4. Longer run aggregate productivity gains are uncertain and depend on various conditions 18
5. Key challenges and opportunities related to inequality and inclusion 37
6. Economic challenges as a result of broader societal risks 42
7. Policy discussion 43
References 47
Annex A. Additional Tables and Figures 59
FIGURES
Figure 1. AI systems in a production function view: inputs and outputs 9
Figure 2. Strong positive expectations on AI’s role in innovation 14
Figure 3. AI patents are widely cited across a range of technologies 14
Figure 4. The relationship between AI and productivity or worker performance: selected estimates from the
literature 16
Figure 5. A majority of workers report benefits from using AI 17
Figure 6. AI and aggregate productivity over the long run: main channels 19
Figure 7. The potential effects of AI on productivity levels and growth rates over the long run 21
Figure 8. High productivity and knowledge intensive services are most affected by AI 24
Figure 9. Tasks in knowledge intensive services are more prone to automation by text-based Generative AI 25
Figure 10. The AI occupational exposure and complementarity of jobs: a nuanced picture 26
Figure 11. AI patenting increased dramatically, with high cross-country concentration 27
Figure 12. The adoption of AI is much lower than that of other digital technologies+ 28
Figure 13. AI adoption is still limited compared to the spread of previous General Purpose Technologies 29
Figure 14. AI related vacancies require more advanced technical and complementary skills 30
Figure 15. AI skill demand is concentrated in knowledge intensive services and manufacturing 31
Figure A.1. Stylised conceptual view of an AI system (per OECD AI Principles) 62
Figure A.2. The AI system lifecycle 62
Figure A.3. AI Skills are Concentrated in Specific Countries 63
Figure A.4. Risks from adopting AI as seen by scientists 63
TABLES
Table 1. Comparing AI to selected previous General Purpose Technologies 12
Table A.1. OECD AI Principles 59
Table A.2. Estimates on the effect of AI on firm productivity and worker performance 61
 5
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Main Findings
1. The paper adopts a “production function” view of AI systems to characterise their main
economic features and implications. In particular, AI systems are considered as combining
intangible inputs (software, skills, data) and computing capacity to produce a wide range of
outputs (analytical tasks like prediction, recommendations or optimisation; content generation;
and physical tasks in association with robotics).
2. Potentially higher autonomy, the ability of some AI systems to self-improve and to speed up
the pace of innovation by boosting research may distinguish AI from previous major General
Purpose Technologies, posing both opportunities and risks:
a. AI may have the potential to revive sluggish productivity growth and lead to gains in
aggregate welfare, as suggested by initial positive evidence on innovation and workers’ and
firms’ productivity;
b. But it could also exacerbate distributional divides and bring broader societal risks, which
could backlash on AI developments and productivity.
3. Despite initial encouraging micro evidence, longer-run aggregate productivity outcomes of
AI are still uncertain:
a. Will productivity gains by early AI adopters and firms at the productivity frontier trickle down
to other firms?
b. Will labour reallocation (within and across sectors) sustain aggregate growth or result in a
new “Baumol-disease” weighing on productivity growth, notably due to extensive labour
automation and reallocation towards lower productivity growth sectors?
c. Will measures taken to address societal issues slow down AI development and adoption?
4. A number of conditions could promote the favourable effects of AI, where policies can play a
key role, as also specified by the OECD AI Principles:
a. Competitive AI systems development and widespread diffusion (e.g., ease AI access)
b. Strong human complementarity on the AI user side (e.g., skills, new tasks) prevailing over
human substitution via the automation of tasks (e.g., steering of AI development, education
and training for AI)
c. Acceptance/reliability/trust in AI development and adoption (e.g., AI governance)
5. Current evidence suggests that these conditions are far from being met:
a. Advanced AI inputs are concentrated in big tech;
b. AI adoption is still limited and uneven across firms and sectors;
c. The balance between AI use that is human-augmenting vs. human-substituting (via
complementarity vs automation) is still uncertain, with Generative AI putting even
knowledge-intensive occupations at risk of automation, especially at entry levels.
6. Not meeting these conditions could lead to economic and welfare costs from AI, which could
hinder its potential to significantly raise productivity. These risks include:
a. Increasing market power and reducing dynamism of AI developers and AI users;
b. Increasing inequality and hampering inclusion;
c. Broader societal risks, such as growing misinformation, biases and privacy violations,
along with longer term existential risks.
7. To mitigate these risks, a broad range of policy domains are under discussion:
a. Most immediate priorities include ensuring market competition and broader access to AI
technologies while preserving innovation incentives.
6 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
b. The consequences of AI for job displacement and inequality also call for prompt action
related to training, education and redistributive measures.
c. Reducing risks related to bias, misinformation and privacy.
d. Devising governance mechanisms that are able to cope with rapid and unpredictable
improvements of AI capabilities.
 7
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
1. Introduction
This paper focuses on the economic benefits and costs of Artificial Intelligence (AI), with a strong emphasis
on its potential in driving productivity growth both at the micro- and at the macro levels. It discusses the
key mechanisms, presents initial empirical evidence and highlights the main policy challenges. The
burgeoning field and the very active policy discussion AI underscores the strong expectations and fears
that the technology presents both unprecedented opportunities and significant challenges. To advance a
common understanding of these issues, the OECD, spearheaded by the OECD Policy Observatory on AI
(OECD.AI), has been at the forefront in developing a unified terminology with a range of stakeholders.
These efforts have had a strong impact on the global discussion in particular regarding technical, legal and
regulatory aspects, culminating in the widely endorsed AI Principles ( (OECD, 2019[1]) and a summary in
Table A.1) and in the broad acceptance of the OECD’s AI definition in legislative work.
1
This paper builds on and complements this work.2
It considers the “production function” of AI systems to
characterise the economic features of AI, identifies key inputs, outputs and the type of tasks it carries out
(Section 2). In particular, AI systems are regarded as combining intangible inputs such as software, skills,
and data with substantial computing capacity and complementary technologies (e.g., robotics, biotech),
while having the capacity to generate a diverse array of outputs ranging from complex analytical tasks
(prediction, recommendations, optimisation, etc.) and content creation to contributing to the execution of
physical tasks (e.g., autonomous vehicles). These features set the stage for AI's transformative role,
shaping the backbone of its economic potential as a new General-Purpose Technology.
AI's uniqueness stems not just from its ability to perform complex tasks, but particularly from its enhanced
potential for autonomy and self-improvement, accelerating innovation. These characteristics differentiate
AI from previous major technologies – often referred to as General Purpose Technologies in the literature
on growth and innovation (Lipsey, Carlaw and Bekar, 2005[2]) – , including in the digital sphere, such as
computers and the internet. Early evidence linking AI to enhanced productivity and performance at the
microeconomic level, along with several promising innovations in various industries, lend support to the
expectation that AI's development and widespread adoption may be capable to revive sluggish productivity
growth and to raise wellbeing (Section 3).
However, the overall long-term productivity outcomes of AI at the macroeconomic level are still uncertain,
contingent on various factors such as how AI impacts market dynamism and market functioning. Critical
questions are: Will the productivity gains achieved by early AI adopters extend to other firms? Will AI
exacerbate performance disparities and distributional divides? What will be the consequences of AI for
inclusion? And, importantly, will labour reallocation, both within and across sectors, fuel sustained
aggregate growth; or will be a drag under a new form of "Baumol's disease," spurred by extensive AIdriven labour automation and a large share of the workforce ending up in low-productivity activities?
(Sections 4 and 5)
To navigate these uncertainties and ensure favourable outcomes, several conditions must be met, with
policy playing a crucial role. These include competitive AI system development and widespread diffusion,
in a way that strikes a balance between augmenting human skills (complementing) and automating human
tasks (substitution) with AI. However, current trends indicate that we are far from achieving these ideals.
Critical AI inputs are largely concentrated in big tech firms, AI adoption remains limited and uneven across
firms, and the balance between human-augmenting and human-substituting uses of AI is still in flux. This
1 The OECD.AI site also showcases the broad range of AI-related work across the OECD in various domains.
2
In parallel, several national and international institutions have been working on overviews on the economic
implications of AI, such as (Comunale and Manera, 2024[185]) from the IMF, (Artificial Intelligence Commission of
France, 2024[184]) from France and (Council of Economic Advisers, 2024[8]) from the US, among others.
8 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
is particularly pertinent with the advent of Generative AI (e.g., models creating text, image and other
media), which poses risks of automating even knowledge-intensive occupations, especially at entry levels.
Moreover, as pointed out by a group of experts on AI Futures designated by the OECD (OECD, 2022[3]),
AI's implications extend well beyond productivity effects, encompassing broader societal challenges such
as power concentration, mass persuasion and manipulation (e.g., by malicious governments or
corporations), misuse (e.g., in cyber weaponry or critical infrastructure), overreliance on AI in critical
decision-making despite known flaws. They also include deteriorating training data quality and
misalignment between AI systems and human goals or values, which could even lead to existential risks.
Focusing on implications that can backlash on economic outcomes, some of these issues are briefly
mentioned in the paper – such as threats to privacy, the potential for growing misinformation and loss of
human control over AI decisions (Section 6). These challenges, if unaddressed, could also undermine the
potential productivity and welfare benefits that AI beholds, especially if the societal issues they raise lead
to a slowdown in AI development and diffusion.
To effectively manage these downside risks and harness AI's full potential, a comprehensive approach
encompassing education, competition, redistributive, and regulatory policies will be discussed in Section
7. The most immediate priorities involve promoting market competition and enhancing widespread
availability of AI technologies while ensuring their reliability (e.g., via auditing requirements) and preserving
innovation incentives and capabilities. The consequences of AI on job displacement and inequality might
take a bit more time to appear, but they still require prompt policy action in terms of training, education,
and redistribution measures. Policymakers should also devise both national and international governance
mechanisms that are able to cope with rapid and unpredictable improvements of AI capabilities to ensure,
for instance, that minimum requirements are met in terms of their safe and ethical development and use.
2. What is AI and what does it do? An economic view
According to the recently updated OECD definition, “an AI system is a machine-based system that for
explicit or implicit objectives, infers, from the input it receives, how to generate outputs such as predictions,
content, recommendations, or decisions that can influence physical or virtual environments. Different AI
systems vary in their levels of autonomy and adaptiveness after deployment.” (OECD, 2023[4]). This
definition formed the basis for the definition of an AI system used in the EU AI Act and the 2023 US
Executive Order on Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence. A stylised conceptual view is
provided in Figure A.1.
Economists tend to use various definitions of AI, for instance: “AI is a loose term used to describe a range
of advanced technologies that exhibit human‑like intelligence including machine learning, autonomous
robotics and vehicles, computer vision, language processing, virtual agents, and neural networks.”
(Furman and Seamans, 2019[5]) or “AI is an umbrella term that refers to a computer system that is able to
sense, reason, or act like a human.” (Brynjolfsson, Li and Raymond, 2023[6]). Recent work jointly carried
out by computer scientists and economists (Sastry et al., 2024[7]) writes: “Artificial intelligence (AI) refers
to the science and engineering of building digital systems capable of performing tasks commonly thought
to require intelligence, with this behaviour often being learned rather than directly programmed.”
2.1. AI systems in a production function view: requirements (inputs) and
capabilities (outputs)
Given the focus of this paper on economic and, in particular, on productivity implications, AI systems are
considered as a type of production technology which relies on a range of inputs and produces a range of
outputs, as discussed below and illustrated on Figure 1. This approach captures most of the elements
discussed by economists regarding AI’s capabilities (i.e. the type of jobs and tasks potentially affected by
 9
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
AI), similar to others featured in recent policy analysis (Council of Economic Advisers, 2024[8]) or
emphasised by regulatory bodies (e.g., (CMA, 2023[9])) as well as previous OECD work on building
computing capacity (OECD, 2023[10]). The two subsections below explain and discuss the key components.
For ease of exposition regarding the main economic features and implications of AI systems, the
terminology may differ from reports with a more technical focus, notably (OECD, 2023[10]).
Figure 1. AI systems in a production function view: inputs and outputs
Note: see more detailed explanations in Section 2.1 on inputs and outputs. For ease of exposition regarding the main economic features and
implications of AI systems, the terminology may differ from reports with a more technical focus, notably (OECD, 2023[10]).
*Positive feedback loop refers mostly to the training, pre-deployment phase.
Source: OECD, building on (CMA, 2023[9]) the AI Blueprint for Building AI Compute Capacity (OECD, 2023[10]) and (Sastry et al., 2024[7])
2.1.1. Inputs
AI systems rely on a few key intangible and tangible assets which can be considered as inputs. These are
sometimes also called “elements of the AI value chain” (CMA, 2023[9]). These inputs are all strongly
complementary to each other, so much so that AI systems can also be seen as a bundle of these assets
(Corrado, Haskel and Jona-Lasinio, 2021[11]). Among intangible inputs, skills are critical and include highly
trained IT engineers, programmers and data scientists. Their knowledge is embedded mostly in another
critical input: software, in the form of the AI model. Such software requires data - often vast quantities of
it –, the third key intangible component. It can take various forms and can enter the system at various
phases: either for the development phase of AI, which is typically large scale training data used prior to
deployment, or for its actual use phase (post-deployment), when additional data may used by the AI model
to execute a query. For a more elaborate and detailed discussion of the various phases of the AI system
“lifecycle” – including AI design and research, validation and verification, deployment and actual operation
–, see (OECD, 2022[12]) (summarised in Figure A.2).
Software and data require a physical (tangible) AI infrastructure, most importantly computing power and
capacity (semiconductor chips) and also connectivity.
3 Advanced AI systems often require top
performance semiconductor chips or specialised computing infrastructure not only during the initial, mostly
developmental phase (pre-deployment), but also in actual operation, during the use phase (post3
(Artificial Intelligence Commission of France, 2024[184]) also notes this as a key concern. For more details on AI
infrastructure and computing capacity, see (OECD, 2023[10]).
10 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
deployment).
4 The development, training or some applications of AI often rely on interactions between
remote servers and local machineries and terminals. Maintaining such high computing power and
connectivity requires an intensive use of energy and high-quality internet infrastructure, both being possibly
critical inputs.
This input-based perspective also provides guidance to resolving challenges of measuring investments
carried out specifically to build AI systems (AI investments, in short) in official statistics among the various
intangible assets. In particular, such investment partly overlaps with computerised (digitised) information
(software and databases); the development of new, original AI algorithms falls in R&D; while applications
of existing AI might also be found in market research and IT consulting services (included in organizational
capital). AI investments – including both tangible and intangible ones – are also likely to be complementary
to these assets.
2.1.2. Outputs and AI types
Current AI systems can carry out or assist with cognitive tasks, such as creating content (text, program
code, visuals, etc) or with taking decisions based on sophisticated predictions, recommendations and
optimisation (Agrawal, Gans and Goldfarb, 2023[13]).
5 When combined with robotics – machines equipped
with sensors and fine motor capacities, such as autonomous vehicles – they can also perform physical
tasks, as in the case of autonomous vehicles (Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2014[14]). Recent multi-modal AI
systems combine several capabilities.
Based on the typical use of their outputs, a useful distinction can be made between more recent
Generative AI and prediction, optimisation or decision-oriented AI, to be called in the paper – for the lack
of an alternative term which is established and evocative – non-Generative AI (sometimes also being
referred to as Discriminative AI or pre-Generative AI).
6 Both of these two broad types of current AI models
are deeply tied to probability as they evaluate a myriad possible outputs and select one based on learned
probabilistic distributions. Hence the dichotomy between these two categories is not always clear-cut, with
many modern AI systems blending data-driven techniques with cognitive structures. Nevertheless, it is still
useful to differentiate them according to their capabilities and typical use as they can accomplish - or assist
with - different types of tasks:
• Non-Generative AI primarily relies on algorithms that draw information directly from vast data
sets to detect patterns, forecast outcomes and support decisions. The dominant technique is
Machine Learning (ML), and its more sophisticated subset, Deep Learning (DL). This kind of
AI employs probabilistic models to predict outcomes and give recommendations. ML models
power core AI tasks such as pattern recognition (e.g. , text, image, audio), even detection
(anomalies), personalisation (e.g. user behaviour analyses) and goal-driven optimisation (e.g.
traffic routing) (OECD, 2022[12]). The strength of recent non-Generative AI lies in the ability to
handle extremely large and potentially unlabelled and unstructured datasets.
• Generative AI systems – the more recent type of AI – are mainly designed to produce content,
such as text, program code, images, videos, or sounds in response to natural (human)
4 Some chips are specifically designed for AI-related calculations, such as tensor processing units (TPUs), or various
chips are combined to achieve enormous amounts of computing power for running AI models (strings of graphical
processing units, GPUs in super computers operating in the cloud).
5 Sometimes a broader definition of AI is used than in these papers, which encompasses somewhat less recent
software and hardware that carry out sophisticated calculations, including ones that are not based on probabilistic
calculations and predictions (see (Kotlikoff, 2022[200]) ), citing as an example GPS navigation systems without yet real
time traffic information).
6 A recent speech by Fed Governor Lisa Cook differentiates Generative AI from “discriminative AI”, which carries out
mostly image and text classification (Cook, 2023[208]).
 11
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
language queries, or prompts. Large Language Models (LLMs) fall under this category, with
ChatGPT7 by Open AI being a key example. Generative AI systems are enabled by the
“transformer” architecture developed in 2017, which are more efficient than their predecessors
(recurrent neural networks) because they can process natural language input in parallel rather
than merely in sequence, thus effectively reducing training and computing time (OECD,
2023[79]). This breakthrough allowed for exponential increases in scale and complexity, with
the most refined models featuring billions of parameters (Lorenz, Perset and Berryhill,
2023[15]). Some Generative AI models are considered “foundation” models, given their broad
applicability in a range of fields, as opposed to tailor-made models targeting a specific task.
Besides text, foundation models can produce sophisticated software code, sounds, artworks
or photorealistic images (e.g. Stable Diffusion or DALL-E) and video (e.g. Sora).
As shown in Figure 1, most current AI systems that fall under one of these categories are also
characterized by a positive feedback-loop, that is self-improvement capacity or learning (hence the
expression machine learning) that can lead to better performance. On the one hand, self-improvement
may occur while being trained, that is optimising and finetuning the model parameters without yet changing
the basic design of the AI model itself (e.g., pricing algorithms). Sometimes this process occurs
continuously, while in actual use (technically called inference phase, see (OECD, 2022[12])), allowing the
system to quickly adapt to evolving situations (e.g., designing targeted ads, refining pricing algorithms).
On the other hand, there is a distinct future possibility of a more fundamental self-improvement of AI that
creates a new AI model. This is seen as one of the various potential avenues through which Artificial
General Intelligence (AGI)8 would be achieved in the future, which is usually defined as an AI that
surpasses human level intelligence on nearly all cognitive domains.
9 This carries inherent risks to the
extent that AI-generated successive AI models may deviate from the goals and intentions of the initial
human-designed AI model (Korinek, 2023[16])(see Section 6 on broader societal risks).
2.2. How is AI different from previous technologies?
Recent major technologies that have had a strong economic impact include computers, the internet, and
previously the steam engine and electricity. These are typically referred to as General Purpose
Technologies, because of their ubiquitous nature as key components in a wide range of technical and
economic applications including innovation (Lipsey, Carlaw and Bekar, 2005[2]) (Bresnahan and
Trajtenberg, 1995[17]).
10 AI can be considered as the latest element on this list (Varian, 2019[18]); (Agrawal,
Gans and Goldfarb, 2019[19]), enabling further innovation and thus possibly generating a long-lasting
positive impact on productivity, especially in combination with other recent or emerging General-Purpose
Technologies such as robotics or biotechnology (Cockburn, Henderson and Stern, 2018[20]) (Ing and
7 The GPT acronym in ChatGPT stands for Generative Pre-trained Transformer, and does not refer to General Purpose
Technologies. Throughout the paper the acronym GPT alone refers to General Purpose Technologies, and ChatGPT
refers to the AI product developed by OpenAI.
8 Ongoing work by the OECD expert group on AI Futures investigates AGI (OECD.AI).
9 This could lead to what is often called the technological singularity – a point where technological advancement
becomes self-sustaining, advancing rapidly and without significant human input, thus accelerating dramatically and
uncontrollably (Kurzweil, 2005[197]).
10 Some authors (for instance, (Jovanovic and Rousseau, 2005[198]). consider a broader encompassing term –
Information Technologies – instead of computers and the internet as the relevant General-Purpose Technology.
12 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Grossman, 2022[21]).
11 At the same time, AI has a few key features that differentiate it from previous
General-Purpose Technologies (GPTs) (Table 1) (Agrawal, Gans and Goldfarb, 2023[22]).
Table 1. Comparing AI to selected previous General Purpose Technologies
Steam engine and
electricity
Computers and
internet
Artificial
Intelligence
Main output Energy Calculations and
information
exchange
Advanced
analytics
(predictions,
optimisation)
and content
generation
Nature of tasks
primarily affected
Physical Cognitive routine
and communication
Broad range of
cognitive
Autonomy?
(operate
independently from
humans)
No Limited Potentially
advanced
Capacity for selfimprovement?
No No Yes
A method of
invention?
No Yes Yes
Source: OECD, building on (Lipsey, Carlaw and Bekar, 2005[2]) and (Agrawal, Gans and Goldfarb, 2023[22])
Previous General Purpose Technologies such as steam and electricity provided energy as their main
output, and as such affected primarily physical tasks at the time of their invention. In contrast, computers
and the internet produce intangible outputs such as calculations and the ability to exchange information
remotely, thus affecting mostly cognitive tasks (while still being capable of impacting physical tasks when
controlling machinery and equipment). AI is similar to the latter in affecting cognitive tasks, but AI
“produced” tasks tend to be more versatile and more advanced, thanks to highly sophisticated predictions,
analytics and generated content. Key differences emerge when considering the higher degree of AI’s
autonomy compared to computers – the extent to which the technology can operate without human
intervention –, and the capacity for self-improvement, which are even more specific to AI. Self-improvement
in turn increases AI’s model complexity possibly exceeding the human capacity to understand its
functioning (“black box” type behaviour), thus reducing model transparency and predictability. Further,
when increasing its scale (parameter size, training data, etc.) an AI model may also produce unexpected
outcomes, such as when LLMs acquired the ability to reason and translate (Wei and et al, 2022[23]). These
distinct features – high autonomy and self-improvement – thus offer opportunities for self-sustained welfare
gains but come with a risk of moving beyond human control.
The idea generation and idea testing capacity of AI makes it not only an automation technology – raising
productivity mostly in a one-off, static manner through improving on current production and current
processes – but a method of invention or invention technology – with the potential to lift productivity
11 Machine learning, a subset of AI technology, is considered a General-Purpose Technology only as part of a broader
cluster of recently developed technologies – including enhanced data collection and processing (data mining) and
natural language processing (Goldfarb, Taska and Teodoridis, 2023[199]).
 13
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
growth boosting research and innovation (Cockburn, Henderson and Stern, 2018[20]).
12 This would allow
AI to counterbalance the threat of a “scarcity of ideas” possibly emerging with declining populations (Jones,
2023[24]), as well as to make it easier to “build taller and taller ladders” to go beyond the low hanging fruits
of scientific discovery (Mokyr, 2018[25]); or to overcome the diminishing returns to innovation inputs
contributing to slowing innovation outcomes (Bloom et al., 2020[26]).
13
The perception of AI being an emerging method of invention is broadly shared in the research community
(Bianchini, Müller and Pelletier, 2022[27]). For example, Figure 2 below reports the results of a global survey
among researchers from a broad range of fields, which found that more than 80% of respondents believes
that AI will become either essential or (very) useful for their work in the next decade, while only 4% doubts
that it could be of any use (Van Noorden and Perkel, 2023[28])
14. According to the survey, its primary benefits
would be speeding up cognitive tasks such as data processing and computations. To a lesser extent, AI is
expected to open up new paths for research, such as processing unstructured data (e.g., images),
optimising experimental setups and generating new research hypotheses, as recently demonstrated by
(Ludwig and Mullainathan, 2024[29]). This is in line with evidence showing that companies that increase
investment in AI skills successively achieve higher innovation as measured by number of trademarks,
patents and new products (Babina et al., 2024[30]). Case studies and opinions of field experts also point
out that the latest developments in AI can be pivotal as they allow to verify scientific claims or to direct
research efforts, among others. Preliminary results from such improvements are already detectable in
fields such as biology (e.g., protein folding, (Jumper et al., 2021[31])), chemistry, mathematics, physics or
medicine (e.g., drug discoveries and diagnosis) (Microsoft Research, 2023[32]; OECD, 2023[33]).
12 Some authors consider innovation-boosting potential already as part of the key defining characteristics of GPTs
(Jovanovic and Rousseau, 2005[198]).
13 However, several dangers are associated with implementing AI in research, such as further contributing to and
speeding up the spread of false information, bias, plagiarism, and fabrication, as noted by a survey among scientists
(Figure A.1; also (Dougherty, 2024[176]) and Section 6). These issues could jeopardise the market for information and
scientific research, as consumers and researchers might pre-emptively distrust both authentic and potentially fake
results.
14 The authors stress that results might not be representative of all scientists, due to high non-response rates in the
survey. However, the assessment on the usefulness of AI varies minimally between scientists who declare using AI
and those who still do not. This indicates that non-response behaviour – to the extent it is driven by a lack of experience
in AI use – is likely to lead only to a small bias.
14 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Figure 2. Strong positive expectations on AI’s role in innovation
Survey results among researchers (2023)
How useful AI tools will become for researchers in your field
in the next decade?
What are the positive impacts of AI in research?
Source: (Van Noorden and Perkel, 2023[28]), Nature.
Note: Results based on a survey questionnaire among 1,600 active researchers across the globe and in a broad range of fields. Responses
were voluntary and, as noted by the authors, may thus predominantly reflect the view of those who are interested in AI.
The breadth of the technological domains in which AI patents are referred to – captured by a technological
generality index – indicates the general nature of the technology: AI-related inventions are more broadly
cited than non-AI ones (Figure 3). This is consistent with AI being a GPT in the field of invention as well
(Lipsey, Carlaw and Bekar, 2005[2]), although the full impact of AI’s innovative potential in downstream,
more applied, industries has yet to be seen.
Figure 3. AI patents are widely cited across a range of technologies
Based on patent citation intensities of AI and non-AI related patents (2010-2018)
Note: Vertical axis shows values of the technical generality index, derived from patent citation intensities.
Source: (Calvino et al., 2023[34])
These emerging unique capabilities of AI pose both enormous opportunities and challenges. Taken
together, they are conducive to potentially extreme and uncertain outcomes including large gains and
 15
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
devastating harms if uncontained. Focusing on the economic implications, AI may have the potential to
revive the sluggish productivity growth observed in most advanced economies during the past decades (
(Goldin et al., 2024[35]) ; (Andre and Gal, 2024[36]) provided that early micro-level evidence (Section 3) can
be extended to the macro level, as shown by some illustrative long-term scenarios suggested by (Baily,
Brynjolfsson and Korinek, 2023[37])(Section 4). More generally, AI can also lead to improvements in overall
welfare, notably through breakthroughs in healthcare, by providing better quality services and taking over
more tedious elements of work. However, AI also has the potential to exacerbate performance and
distributional divides and large-scale job displacement (Sections 5 and 6), and to undermine information
and trust systems that are key prerequisites for economic activities and could present more fundamental
risks to humanity, sometimes referred to as “existential risk” (Acemoglu and Lensman, 2023[38]). (Jones,
2023[39])(Section 6).
3. Early micro level evidence: AI can yield substantial performance gains
AI systems are improving their performance in a variety of domains at dramatic pace (Felten, Raj and
Seamans, 2021[40]). Even if the technology is fundamentally built on solving prediction problems, a large
and increasing number of tasks can be (re-)framed as prediction problems, and thus effectively solved by
AI, ranging from image recognition to optimisation problems as well as to text and image generation. This,
in turn, has the potential to raise productivity in various economic activities, a perspective that generated
enthusiasm about the broader positive impacts of AI (Furman, 2016[41]; Furman and Seamans, 2019[42]).
Since the 2000s, academic studies have assessed the impact of evolving AI technologies on various
performance and productivity measures in different countries and economic contexts and by using different
metrics for AI use (Figure 4). Before the advent of Generative AI, empirical research examined the impact
of AI adoption primarily at the firm level (left panel). The estimated effects on firm-level labour productivity
range from 0 to 11%. Some of these gains are sizeable and comparable to estimates of gains from the
adoption of other digital technologies (Brynjolfsson and M. Hitt, 2003[43]) (Gal et al., 2019[44]) :
• OECD research covering 9 OECD economies during 2016-2021 highlights that AI use, as
measured by yes/no questions in employers surveys, is associated with significantly higher
productivity on average. However, the correlation becomes insignificant, with the exception of a
few countries, when trying to isolate the marginal effect of AI by controlling for the use of other ICT
technologies (Calvino and Fontanelli, 2023[45]) (labelled as AI use (9 countries) in the Figure).
• A more detailed study on France among firms developing or using AI shows a similar finding (AI
use (FR)), with the exception of AI developers where the marginal effect of AI remains statistically
significant even after controlling for ICT (AI developer (FR)) (Calvino and Fontanelli, 2023[46]).
• Other scholars used patents data to measure AI technologies in firms, finding a positive effect of
both an AI-patenting 0-1 indicator in the US (Alderucci et al., 2020[47]) (AI patents (US)) and of a
continuous measure of the number of patents by firms in the EU and UK (Damioli, Van Roy and
Vertesy, 2021[48]) (AI patents (EU+UK)).
• Using a more robust identification strategy to isolate the causal effect of AI use, a recent article
finds a significant positive effect of AI in German firms based on self-reported AI adoption
(Czarnitzki, Fernández and Rammer, 2023[49]) (AI use (DE)).
15
15 The estimate of (Czarnitzki, Fernández and Rammer, 2023[49]) is more robust to endogeneity of AI use as they
exploit an instrumental variable strategy using as instruments industrial investment in AI, past innovation expenses
per employee, and internal resistance to innovation.
16 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Figure 4. The relationship between AI and productivity or worker performance: selected estimates
from the literature
Note: *controlling for other ICT technologies. In the left panel, “AI use” is a 0-1 dummy obtained by firm surveys, while AI patents refers either
to a 0-1 dummy for having at least 1 patent (US study) or to the number of patents in firms (for the EU+UK study, where the average number is
0.48 with 2.6 standard deviation, so that firms cumulating more than one patents are relatively few). Two of the estimates in the panel (“9
countries, 2016-21”) relate to the same study (Calvino and Fontanelli, 2023[45]), but the second estimate controls for other ICT technology use
and thus better isolates the marginal impact of AI. Given that the study reports separate estimates for all 9 countries, the median estimate across
countries is shown on the Figure.
Source: authors’ compilation from micro level studies. See more details in the text and in Table A.2.
Following the introduction of Generative AI technologies, in particular Large Language Models such as
ChatGPT, more recent research has studied the effect of specific AI tools on worker performance (Figure
4 right panel). This line of research typically uses experimental methods which deliver more causal
identification and hence more robust evidence than is typically the case for firm-level studies cited above.
These more recent estimates of Generative AI indicate large effects on worker performance in specific
tasks, ranging from 10% to 56%:
• Researchers in the US exploited the staggered adoption over time of AI-based support to
customer service employees in business process software developer companies in 2020-
2021, finding a large and significant increase in the number of case resolutions per worker
(Brynjolfsson, Li and Raymond, 2023[50]) (labelled as Customer-service, 2020-21 on the
Figure).
• Another study estimated the effect of AI coding assistants on software developers, finding an
extremely high and significantly positive effect on the number of coding tasks completed (Peng
et al., 2023[51]) (Coding - 2022).
• Finally, the advent of ChatGPT spurred a number of randomized controlled experiments
estimating its effect on workers, finding a large and significant positive effect of the AI
technology:
o on the speed and quality of professional writing tasks (Noy and Zhang, 2023[52])
(Professional writing – 2022),
o business consulting performances (Dell’Acqua et al., 2023[53]) (Business consulting –
2023),
o and time and quality of writing tasks for a sample of workers (Haslberger, Gingrich and
Bhatia, 2023[54]) (General writing – 2023).
Non-Generative AI
Firm-level studies on labour productivity
Generative AI
Worker-level studies on performance in specific tasks
 17
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
However, considering the different focus (firm-level vs worker- and task level), these two sets of studies –
from which key estimates are shown on the two panels of Figure 4 –, are not directly comparable.
Especially, it is not straightforward to extend large worker-level and task specific gains to firm-level
productivity increases. Moreover, worker-level studies are carried out in companies that are keener to
experiment with the technology (early adopters), and hence the results do not necessarily apply to typical
firms. Notwithstanding these caveats, the early micro-level evidence suggests that productivity gains from
AI can be substantial, especially among early adopters of the latest generation of AI.
These average effects also hide considerable heterogeneity. For instance, (Calvino and Fontanelli,
2023[45]; Calvino and Fontanelli, 2023[46]) show that larger firm size seems to yield an additional premium
on AI’s productivity effects. Using Generative AI for completing tasks is also found to yield considerably
higher gains for inexperienced workers, up to one-third higher output per hour compared with 14% for
workers with average levels of experience (Brynjolfsson, Li and Raymond, 2023).16
The positive effects on productivity found in the studies mentioned above are corroborated by an OECD
survey (conducted in early 2022, thus focused on non-Generative AI). It emerged that the majority of
employees who use AI at work report not only that AI has improved their performance, but that it has also
improved job enjoyment and their mental and physical health (Figure 5). In addition, qualitative evidence
suggests that companies in different sectors reacted to AI adoption by restructuring the internal
organisation rather than reducing reliance on labour, reallocating workers towards tasks where humans
hold a comparative edge rather than displacing them (Milanez, 2023[55]).
Figure 5. A majority of workers report benefits from using AI
% of respondents who work with AI reporting improvement in performance, job enjoyment and health
Note: Workers in companies that have worked with AI were asked: “How do you think AI has changed your own job performance
(performance)/how much you enjoy your job (enjoyment)?/your physical health and safety in the workplace (physical health)?/your mental health
and well-being in the workplace (mental health)?” The figure shows the proportion of AI users who said that each of these outcomes were
improved (a lot or a little) by AI.
Source: (Lane, Williams and Broecke, 2023[56])“The impact of AI on the workplace: Main findings from the OECD AI surveys of employers and
workers”, https://doi.org/10.1787/ea0a0fe1-en.). Survey responses were broadly similar in the manufacturing sector and in a knowledge-intensive
service sector with heavy AI use (finance and insurance) (OECD, 2023[57]).
Case studies in specific sectors also offer preliminary evidence about the transformative potential of AI on
production processes. An early example has been the integration of AI in technically-advanced activities
in pharmaceuticals (e.g., assisting with drug discoveries), aerospace (e.g., developing new materials
16 The impact of AI on different categories of workers is further explored in Section 5.1.
18 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
(Merchant et al., 2023[58])), semiconductors, mining, and construction (OECD, 2020[59]). In the
pharmaceutical sector, the adoption of Generative AI could lead to an annual increase in value added by
2.6 to 4.5 percent, primarily via helping with the research and development of new drugs (McKinsey,
2023[60]). Important applications are also found in services sectors, such as finance, where a fourth of
hedge-fund managers reports at least 80% of decision making is relying on AI. Moreover, investment in
AI-related ventures has tripled over the past five years, and AI research intensity has increased fivefold in
the last two decades (OECD, 2021[61]; BarclayHedge, 2018[62]; OECD, 2023[63]). Even in sectors that were
not the most rapid to adopt digital technologies, such as the transport or the public sectors, studies suggest
that AI can significantly contribute to raise efficiency (Berryhill et al., 2019[64]; Kanazawa et al., 2022[65]).
Yet other evidence points to higher market valuations of firms whose workers are in occupations that are
more “exposed to” the latest class of Generative AI models (that is, likely to be more affected by, either
now or in the future) compared to those that are non-AI exposed but otherwise comparable (Eisfeldt,
Schubert and Zhang, 2023[66]).
Since the technology's advancements were developed and began to be utilized very recently, the findings
at the micro or industry level mainly capture the impacts from early adopters and likely indicate short-term
effects. The long-run impact of AI on macro-level productivity growth will depend on the extent of AI use
and its successful integration into business processes, as adoption could differ widely across firms with
different characteristics. Moreover, broader economic adjustments could occur as a consequence of wider
adoption and general equilibrium effects may play out, notably in labour markets. The next section takes
a more macroeconomic perspective, considering the various channels through which these microeconomic
and short-term effects may (or may not) translate into longer-term gains in aggregate productivity.
4. Longer run aggregate productivity gains are uncertain and depend on various
conditions
4.1. A conceptual framework and a few illustrative estimates
The rapid pace of AI development has spurred an active debate about its transformative potential and its
effects on aggregate growth and productivity. The key question is whether AI can materially enhance
aggregate productivity (Vollrath, 2020[67]). So far, the acceleration of AI development and diffusion has not
been associated with higher productivity growth at the macroeconomic level, thus failing to counterbalance
the prolonged productivity slowdown, driven mainly by weakening multi-factor productivity (MFP) (Andre
and Gal, 2024[36]; Goldin et al., 2024[35]). However, delayed aggregate productivity responses are common
to General Purpose Technologies.
17 (Brynjolfsson, Rock and Syverson, 2021[68]) recently argued
influentially that new technologies initially require investment in complementary inputs – not well measured
in National Accounts yet – before they can bring productivity gains. This leads to a Productivity- J curve,
characterising the adoption of a new General Purpose Technology. In the first stage of adoption, both
output and input are systematically underestimated because of unmeasured intangible investment but in
a second stage there is an overestimation of MFP once the benefits of technological complementary
intangible assets materialize. Indeed, a good deal of AI investments are intangible assets that are currently
hardly measured and integrated into macroeconomic statistics. As a result, their overall aggregate effects
may be difficult to capture.
Conceptually, after a period of experimentation and learning, AI adoption will impact workers with various
skill levels, either by augmenting their tasks or by (partly) automating them (Autor, 2024[69]). In the case of
17 “You can see the computer age everywhere but in the productivity statistics.” – quipped Robert Solow in 1987,
referring to the lack of apparent productivity gains despite the widespread use of personal computers, also known as
the Productivity Paradox of the 1970s and 80s.
 19
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
automation, AI performs tasks instead of humans, consisting of a substitution of labour with capital. In the
case of augmentation, AI performs the job with humans, acting as a complement to human capabilities. Of
course, this definition can be blurred, and the automation of some workers could be the augmentation of
others (Agrawal, Gans and Goldfarb, 2023[13]) and the effect will change as technology evolves.18 These
effects will be discussed more fully in the light of recent labour market evidence, in Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
In either case, the first-round effects of AI driven automation and augmentation at the firm- or sector level
will in general contribute positively to aggregate productivity.
In addition, more productive sectors and firms relying on AI could attract more resources (labour and
capital) as demand for their AI-powered products and services rises (resulting from the combination of
cheaper and higher quality outputs), generating also a positive contribution to aggregate productivity from
reallocation (Figure 6). These direct effects can be counteracted by a longer term dynamic reallocation
effect as labour resources move away from heavily automated AI-impacted sectors to other parts of the
economy, especially if demand increases for such AI-impacted activities cannot compensate for such
reallocations (see Baumol effect in Section 4.2).
In a sources of growth framework, AI can be considered as a knowledge investment (investment in
innovation) and becomes itself an accountable source of output growth as part of intangible capital.
19 On
the one hand, it can affect labour productivity growth directly via an acceleration of capital accumulation
that boosts the growth contribution of capital deepening; on the other hand, it can boost productivity growth
indirectly by fostering knowledge diffusion and generating spillovers, resulting in an increase in multifactor
productivity (MFP) (Corrado et al. 2022). By feeding the innovation process as a method of invention, AI
may continuously push out the productivity frontier and feed knowledge spillovers and diffusion.
Consequently, the greater and more widespread use of AI can enhance productivity growth via both
channels (Figure 6).
Figure 6. AI and aggregate productivity over the long run: main channels
18 For instance, machine translation and GPS assisted driving may automate core tasks of translators and taxi drivers,
respectively, but they complement many other workers who only occasionally rely on translation and navigation.
Similarly, LLMs that help with writing may disrupt those with writing as a core task but can act as a complement for
workers in other jobs where writing is sometimes needed but is not a core activity – such as manual workers, for
instance (plumbers, repairmen) (Agrawal, Gans and Goldfarb, 2023[13]).
19 Growth accounting evaluates the direct contribution of factor inputs (labour and capital) and the indirect contribution
of technological progress (MFP) to overall output growth (Barro, 1999[201]).
1
Productivity
Labour and capital
input
composition
and reallocation
within and across
sectors
Innovation and
Capital
deepening
AI development and use
Spillovers and
diffusion from
frontier
20 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
However, AI’s productivity effects may be limited by its rising use of data in the creation of commercially
valuable knowledge. Recent work by (Corrado et al., 2023[70]) analyse the growth contribution of data – a
key AI system input as well as part of intangible assets. They suggest that the rising data share in
intangibles has had possibly two opposing effects. On the one hand, the increasing investment in data
assets might have generated an efficiency effect, boosting the contribution of intangible capital to
productivity growth by up to ¼ percentage point. On the other hand, the increased role of proprietary big
data in production processes, especially in the production of commercially valuable knowledge, might have
weakened the diffusion of innovations, slowing down MFP growth via an appropriability effect. In other
words, the broader use of proprietary data can produce a change in the composition of intangible capital
that may have diminished its potential for increasing returns to the extent that the data capital of individual
firms cannot be freely replicated. They evaluate that the negative appropriability effect might have, so far,
more than offset the efficiency effect. Thus, the rise of modern data capital might have been a substantial
contributor to the productivity slowdown. The future interplay of the two effects could shape the growth
contribution of AI, as data are a key important input into the development and use of AI models and the
share of AI-powered activities will tend to increase as the new technology spreads out. Their net impact
on AI’s growth contribution may also be influenced by policies concerning data ownership and access,
including intellectual property rights (e.g., access to copyrighted data for AI training purposes, see following
sections).
In addition, there are also dynamic reallocation effects, related to the balance between the labourautomation and labour-augmentation nature of AI, that come into play with possibly negative impacts on
aggregate productivity growth. These are discussed in Section 4.3 on market dynamism.
4.1.1. Illustrative scenarios
Notwithstanding these uncertainties, various recent scenario-based studies foreshadow AI future growth
contributions that would raise productivity growth substantially relative to current rates. A recent (Goldman
Sachs, 2023[71]) report predicts an annual 1.5 percentage point boost to US labour productivity over the
next decade or so if widespread adoption of AI is achieved (Goldman Sachs, 2023[71]), compared to recent
annual US productivity growth hovering around 1% per annum (Andre and Gal, 2024[36]).
20 Other scholars
consider these estimates reasonable, moreover, they stress that most of the long term impact will likely be
larger and generated by persistently faster growth rates rather than by a level shift with only transitory
growth effects (Baily, Brynjolfsson and Korinek, 2023[37]) (Figure 7). The main drivers of growth are
assumed to result from faster rates of innovation driven by higher efficiency of researchers (which is an
advanced cognitive task that AI is likely to make more productive; see Section 2.2).21
20 This central scenario is surrounded by large uncertainty, ranging from 0.3 to 2.9 percentage point gains per year,
depending on various assumptions about the evolution of AI capabilities.
21 The assumption about the size of the growth rate increase in the illustrative scenario implicitly assumes that the
productivity of researchers and innovators increases by 2/3rd (=1pp increase /1.5pp baseline), which is higher than
what the authors assume for the general productivity increase in cognitive tasks (30%). Further, it is also assumed
that research and innovation outputs translate one-to-one into higher aggregate productivity gains, thus neglecting
lags in the diffusion and adoption of new inventions. Both of these assumptions can be considered fairly optimistic.
Nevertheless, an alternative approach used by (Artificial Intelligence Commission of France, 2024[184]) assumes
productivity-boosting impacts will be similar to previous major technologies (1.3% per year for electricity, and 0.8% for
ICT) which imply similarly high numbers.
 21
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Figure 7. The potential effects of AI on productivity levels and growth rates over the long run
Illustrative scenarios by Bailey, Brynjolfsson and Korinek (2023)
Note: The baseline trajectory follows 1.5% growth per annum, which is the current projection by the Congressional Budget Office. The level
effect assumes an 18% rise over 10 years, resulting from a 30% productivity increase in cognitive tasks which make up 60% of labour inputs.
The growth effect assumes a 1 percentage point increase in the baseline annual growth rate, driven by higher productivity of cognitive workers
engaged in research and innovation.
Source: (Baily, Brynjolfsson and Korinek, 2023[37]), Machines of mind: The case for an AI-powered productivity boom | Brookings
These views are not uniformly shared. Recent calculations by (Acemoglul, 2024[72]) yield much lower
figures – partly due to being much more conservative regarding AI’s innovation boosting potential –, in the
ballpark of less than 1% cumulative productivity growth over 10 years. In addition, as stressed even by the
authors of the more optimistic scenarios, their predicted large positive impacts are by no means a foregone
conclusion. Their realisation hinges on meeting several conditions that would make AI development and
use conducive to such high growth rates. These conditions range from continued improvements in AI
capabilities and fast widespread adoption to ensuring complementarities with human skills and other
technologies. As discussed below, public policies might have a large role to play in ensuring that these
conditions realise.
4.2. Market dynamics, labour reallocation across sectors and aggregate
productivity
AI-induced structural change and the effects of AI on market dynamism are key mediating factors for
longer-term aggregate productivity outcomes. Notwithstanding AI’s peculiar expected impact on boosting
innovation and disrupting economies and societies more broadly, it can also be seen as yet another step
in an automation process that over the past two centuries first involved agriculture and then manufacturing
(Aghion, Jones and Jones, 2018[73]). AI induces a range of supply and demand-driven structural changes
that are reminiscent of the “Baumol cost disease” (Baumol, 1967) phenomenon, which characterised the
transition from manufacturing to services and prior from agriculture to industry. In essence, this means that
slow productivity growth sectors become increasingly larger in the economy, weighing on the expected
positive aggregate productivity impact. In other words, “Economic growth may be constrained not by what
we do well but rather by what is essential and yet hard to improve” (Aghion, Jones and Jones, 2018[73]).
As productivity increases in activities that are exposed to AI, a number of market forces are set in motion:
the relative prices of products resulting from these activities decline fast and the level and composition of
demand changes, also reflecting the increases in real incomes resulting from productivity growth. In fact,
22 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
when new technology boosts production in certain industries, demand for its products will not increase
infinitely as prices fall and income rises (due to market satiation or non-homothetic preferences). Rather,
demand will concentrate in other sectors, thus decreasing the importance of the sectors where
technological change boosted production. This reasoning might apply also to AI-exposed sectors, so that
the share of the AI-exposed sectors in GDP may shrink relative to the share of activities that are not
exposed to AI use.22 In this case, while overall productivity levels in the economy will be higher than preAI, the gain in productivity growth from AI could be attenuated in the long run. In fact, productivity growth
in AI-exposed activities will be counterbalanced by the reallocation of labour towards activities that have
slower productivity growth (e.g., potentially less knowledge intensive, personal services – at least based
on current AI technologies).
23
An historical comparison can be found in the rise of the share of services in GDP which exerted a moderate
but persistent drag on productivity growth in advanced economies – as services tend to have lower labour
productivity growth rates (Sorbe, Gal and Millot, 2018[74]). The same may happen for activities not exposed
to AI in the future, with significant uncertainties about the pace and size of the phenomenon given the rapid
and unpredictable gains in AI capabilities.
24
4.2.1. The degree of AI complementarity with human skills matters greatly
To shed more light on the drivers of the long-run aggregate productivity effects of AI, it is useful to consider
three main factors, pertaining to both the supply side (how AI interacts with labour) and the demand side
(how AI-powered products and services are consumed):
• First, in activities exposed to AI, the tasks executed by the new technology can be either
complements or substitutes to labour (Susskind, 2020[75]), with both of these cases leading to
labour productivity increases in the affected sectors.
• Second, as the technology evolves, new tasks and jobs are created, further sustaining aggregate
productivity gains. For instance, the introduction of computers and internet fostered the creation of
high-paying occupations such as programmers, designers, etc. However, future generations of AI
could automate these new tasks as well, contributing again to a further shrinkage in the role of
labour (Susskind, 2020[75]).
22 (Bessen, 2018[140]) shows that both income and price elasticities of demand can change over time, shaping the
impact of technological change on employment in affected industries. He argues that, in the past, changes in price
elasticities over time have induced inverted U-shaped employment growth patterns following automation-driven
innovations in specific industries such as textiles and more recently automobiles. It is unclear however to what extent
these results can apply to a general-purpose technology such as AI given that reaching saturation levels in demand
could be less likely across a vast range of AI-powered products and services.
23 Consider a very simple illustrative example, with a low labour productivity growth and a high labour productivity
growth sector (e.g., personal services, at 1% per year, vs. IT, with 3% per year). Suppose they have an initial 50-50%
employment share, which implies a 2% per year aggregate labour productivity growth: 0.5 x 1% + 0.5 x 3% = 2%.
What happens when AI induces a strong labour substitution effect in the IT sector, which is not compensated by higher
demand for its output? It will lead to a fall in its employment share, assume for illustrative purposes, to 20%, from the
initial 50%. This shift raises the employment share of the other sector from 50% to 80%. Once the large initial laboursubstitution driven productivity boost fades in the IT sector, aggregate labour productivity growth will decelerate: 0.2 x
3% + 0.8 x 1% = 1.4%.
Slower aggregate productivity growth also occurs even if the long run productivity growth rate of the AI-exposed sector
increases, for instance, from 3 to 5%: 0.2 x 5% + 0.8 x 1% = 1.8%.
24 More recent evidence from EUKLEMS & INTANProd data (https://euklems-intanprod-llee.luiss.it/) revisits the role
of labour reallocation, measured by hours worked, shaping aggregate labour productivity growth in Europe and the
US, and finds that it has been very small over recent decades.
 23
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
• Third, higher demand due to AI-driven increases in incomes could sustain aggregate productivity
growth if the increased demand is directed mainly towards labour intensive and high productivity
growth sectors, such as engineering and other highly knowledge intensive professional services.
Conversely, productivity growth could be further hindered if additional demand is directed toward
labour intensive and low productivity growth sectors such as personal services.
These phenomena typically occur during the diffusion of General Purpose Technologies in the economy.
In the case of AI, given the recent advances in ease of use – particularly with language and image
generating models – the speed of diffusion may be faster than in previous technological waves. However,
successfully integrating AI capabilities with existing business models, which requires additional
complementary investments in data, skills, etc., may still take time. Another key distinction from previous
major technologies could be the rapid pace of AI's ongoing development, which has been notably swift in
recent years and with the exponential rise of computing capacity, it is likely to remain fast in the future.
This has implications on the capacity of labour markets and skills to adjust fast enough.
To sum up, if AI mainly automates human tasks, after the AI-driven initial boost to aggregate productivity
levels, reallocation could induce lower productivity growth over time driven due to the increasing
employment share of low productivity growth activities that are not yet automated by AI (e.g., elderly care,
hospitality, etc.) and the shrinking share of labour in the AI-using activities (Aghion, Jones and Jones,
2018[73]). On the contrary, if AI will still require substantial complementary human labour for specific tasks,
create new tasks for humans, or increase demand for labour-intensive high-productivity sectors25
,
structural change could exert only a minor counteracting influence on the AI-driven aggregate productivity
boost. However, if AI development is very fast, it is not clear that new tasks can be created, and relevant
human skills can be built up, at sufficient speed to support the positive scenarios.
26
4.2.2. Early suggestive evidence from labour markets
It is early to tell which of these forces will dominate, but looking at current evidence from labour markets
can give some initial indications. Numerous studies have concentrated on assessing which industries and
occupations will be most impacted by AI (OECD, 2023[57]), for instance looking at exposure to Predictive
AI (i.e., their potential to be affected by the technology) (Felten, Raj and Seamans, 2021[40]). These studies
show that exposure is concentrated in knowledge-intensive services – such as ICT, telecommunications,
finance and professional services – which are already characterised by high productivity levels and growth,
in some cases similar to those observed in manufacturing (Sorbe, Gal and Millot, 2018[74])(Figure 8).
27 On
the other hand, the evidence for less knowledge-intensive services – which generally have weak
productivity performance – is mixed, some being exposed and others not. Other sectors, including
manufacturing, overall tend to be less exposed.28
Besides identifying how much a sector’s tasks are exposed to AI, a crucial question lies in the nature of
AI’s exposure in these industries. Namely, how much AI can automate workers’ tasks or augment workers’
25 E.g., as might occur if those activities supply mostly superior goods.
26 A more clear elaboration of the role of various conditions in driving long-run aggregate productivity effects would be
explored in planned further work, especially in light of other ongoing long-term structural changes such as
demographics (ageing and workforce shrinkage).
27 These sectors are also characterized by higher income, hence AI might entail an overall more equal income
distribution, as discussed in Section 5.
28 Some jobs, like in administrative and support services, might show low AI exposure because the index focuses
more on non-Generative AI and less on recent Generative AI. Still, early research suggests that jobs impacted by
earlier AI are also likely to be affected by Generative AI, with graphical and interpersonal jobs being more influenced
by the latest AI technologies (Felten, Raj and Seamans, 2023[202]).
24 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
abilities. The balance between automation and augmentation can be investigated, for example, by defining
as potentially automatable tasks those that can be performed by AI without needing to solve ambiguous
problems, to work together with others, or to validate outputs (WEF, 2023[76])
29. Based on these
assumptions, Figure 9 reports tasks that are prone to AI automation or augmentation, as a share of the
total amount of time spent on all tasks in the sector. Interestingly, knowledge-intensive activities (e.g.,
some occupations related to R&D, ICT, finance) are more at risk of automation. However, high-skilled
occupations are also substantially more prone to be complemented than other sectors, at least at the
current stage of Generative AI development, confirming findings by other policy reports on AI (Council of
Economic Advisers, 2024[8]) and on previous waves of automation (Lassébie and Quintini, 2022[77]).
Figure 8. High productivity and knowledge intensive services are most affected by AI
AI exposure of workers by sector (2019), standardized deviations from mean
Note: The index measures the extent to which worker abilities are related to important AI applications. The measure is standardized with mean
zero and standard deviation 1 at the occupation level and then matched to sectors. The figure does not yet include recent Generative AI
models. The countries included are Austria, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Switzerland, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Germany,
Denmark, Estonia, Spain, Finland, France, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Iceland, Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Latvia, Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Sweden, Slovenia, Slovakia, United Kingdom, and United States. See more details in the source.
*Including non-market services, manufacturing, utilities, etc.
Source: OECD Global Forum on Productivity, based on (Felten, Raj and Seamans, 2021[40])
29 Using a more narrow focus on a specific AI-technology, i.e. Computer Vision, a more recent approach predicts how
much the technology will automate vs. substitute jobs by estimating which tasks can be automated in an economically
attractive way (Svanberg et al., 2024[207])
 25
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Figure 9. Tasks in knowledge intensive services are more prone to automation by text-based
Generative AI
Automated and augmented tasks by Generative AI language models, as a share of the total amount of time spent on
all tasks*, by industry, US (2022)
Note: *The remaining share of tasks includes non-AI exposed ones, where AI has an undetermined ambiguous impact.
Knowledge intensive service occupations are marked by bordered bars.
Source: (WEF, 2023[76])
This initial evidence suggests that Generative AI could usher in a shift in the pattern of jobs at risk of
automation from technological change, as knowledge-intensive activities were previously thought to be
less susceptible to automation. However, given current limitations of Generative AI (occasional unreliability
and tendency to hallucinate, among others) (Perez-Cruz and Shin, 2024[78]) (OECD, 2023[79]), both
regulation and market pressure could require businesses and other organisations to “keep the human in
the loop” and avoid complete automation of jobs, to allow for double checking and for discriminating across
various content produced by AI (Korinek, 2023[16]). Partly due to such risks, the regulatory and social
acceptability of AI “decisions” will ultimately determine the degree of automation risk (hence, inversely, the
degree of complementarity) that AI represents in practice.
Recent estimates of the degree of AI occupational exposure and the degree of complementarity accounting
for risks and limits to automation reveal in fact a nuanced picture ( (Cazzaniga et al., 2024[80]), reproduced
in Figure 10). For instance, judges and lawyers are both highly exposed but also highly complementary,
reflecting the notion that they are unlikely to be automated in practice. OECD research also indicates that
employment has grown in occupations that are highly exposed to AI and have high computer use,
suggesting complementarity between AI and labour in these occupations (Georgieff and Hyee, 2021[81]).
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
Automated tasks Augmented tasks
26 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Figure 10. The AI occupational exposure and complementarity of jobs: a nuanced picture
Note: The degree of complementarity to AI reflects not only the technical feasibility of using AI as a complement or substitute for the tasks carried
out by these occupations but also the social acceptability of doing so. For more details, see the source.
Source: (Cazzaniga et al., 2024[80]).
More speculatively, labour demand in AI-exposed activities may increase due to the creation of new,
emerging tasks made possible by AI, such as “prompt engineering” (the ability to ask the right question to
the Generative AI language model). In parallel, AI may also increase relative labour demand in less AIexposed activities, i.e., in services characterised by frequent personal interactions, such as
accommodation, administrative services, personal care. This would especially be the case when demanddriven market forces will push into the same direction, via falling prices of AI-powered goods and services
and more income available for spending in services not automated by AI. Of course, it is currently hard to
foresee the labour market impact of yet-to-arrive occupations and the type of skills they require as well as
to what extent shifts in consumer demand will be relevant.
These potential changes will also have consequences for overall employment, wages and inequality
(Cazzaniga et al., 2024[80]) and Section 5 below). Which workers will be automated and which ones will
instead exploit AI for improving their productivity will be crucial for determining not only how AI will affect
aggregate productivity, as highlighted in the previous subsection, but also how it will change the distribution
of income, both across workers and between labour and capital. Moreover, the overall labour and
distributive impact of AI adoption will be affected by the way government policies influence AI development,
diffusion and use as well as the reallocation of labour across the economy.30
30 For instance, (Acemoglu and Johnson, 2023[182]) make the case for public policies that could promote a “pro-worker”
AI. Similarly, (Korinek and Stiglitz, 2021[180]) and Brynjolfsson (2022) also discuss the benefits of steering AI
development away from a human-automating focus. (Agrawal, Gans and Goldfarb, 2023[13]) argue, on the other hand,
that it would be a misplaced approach, not only because it is very hard to achieve given the long-established incentives
of AI developers and businesses, but also because automation technologies (e.g., writing, in the case LLMs) can act
as complements to many activities (e.g., everyone who needs to write in their job but is not talented at it) and hence
have the potential to raise productivity of those activities.
Complementarity to AI
AI occupational exposure
 27
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
4.3. AI diffusion, market functioning and dynamism
The extent, pattern and speed of AI adoption across the economy will have a key influence on the size and
persistence of aggregate productivity gains by affecting market efficiency, competitive pressures, firm
demographics and innovation incentives. In this, a key role may be played by bottlenecks in access to the
key tangible and intangibles resources required by AI development and use.
4.3.1. AI diffusion: evidence and driving forces
Fast adoption of AI technologies, a requirement for reaping their productivity benefits, should not be taken
for granted. The attempts to build AI have a long history, building on concepts and techniques in computer
sciences which have been invented long time ago (Anyoha, 2017[82]). However, the speed of technological
development in AI has undergone a dramatic acceleration starting with the second half of 2010s. Thus,
the key moment for AI development is only a recent one, thanks to a combination of advances in computing
capacity and the dramatic increases in the availability of data that can be used for training. For example,
Figure 11 estimates the number of patent applications in AI-related technologies under the Patent
Cooperation Treaty (PCT), where identification of AI-related patents follows the OECD methodology
detailed in (Baruffaldi et al., 2020[83]). It also highlights the strong geographic concentration of AI patenting
activity in the US and China, with Japan and the EU substantially lagging behind and other countries
contributing very little.
Figure 11. AI patenting increased dramatically, with high cross-country concentration
Number of PCT patent applications in AI-related technologies
Note: Number of PCT patent applications in AI-related technologies. Data refer to patent applications filed under the Patent Co-operation Treaty
(PCT), according to the filing date and the applicant’s location, using fractional counts. AI-related patents are identified according to the
methodology described in (Baruffaldi et al., 2020[83]).
Source: OECD, STI Micro-data Lab: Intellectual Property Database, http://oe.cd/ipstats, January 2024.
The available survey evidence from official cross-country statistics shows that AI adoption – mostly nonGenerative AI – is still at an early stage compared to other ICT technologies. (Figure 12). Moreover, crosscountry average adoption is very close to the minimum, suggesting that a large number of countries
concentrate close to the lower end of the cross-country distribution of AI adoption.
28 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Figure 12. The adoption of AI is much lower than that of other digital technologies+
% of firms adopting digital technologies (2021 or latest available)
Note: for the average OECD country (average) and the lowest (min) and highest (max) adoption country, at least 10 employee firms.
+Since the latest data refer to 2021, AI adoption predates – hence largely excludes – Generative AI models.
* High speed broadband is defined as having at least 100Mbit/s download speed.
** ERP stands for Enterprise Resource Planning systems.
*** CRM stands for Customer Relationship Management systems.
Source: OECD ICT Access and Usage by Businesses Database.
A slow adoption pace and gradual learning of how best to adapt production processes to make most of the
new technology is typical of General Purpose Technologies. They usually require significant
complementary investments, often concentrated in intangibles that take time to build and can be difficult
to finance (Corrado, Haskel and Jona-Lasinio, 2021[11]). Put differently, “plug and play” applications of
transformative technologies are rare: for the technology to deliver important gains, businesses need to
implement substantial adjustments in the way they manage staff, organize production, collect and use
information and interact with customers and suppliers. This requires creativity and experimentation by
managers, which is risky and time consuming (see J-curve hypothesis in Section 4.1). Moreover, AI
adoption could be slowed down in some sectors, given regulatory restrictions that are aimed at ensuring
trustworthiness and systemic stability, such as in finance.
Comparing adoption rates of AI among firms in the United States with the adoption trajectory of two
previous General Purpose Technologies (electricity and computers) shows that while the initial path
followed by AI seems similar, its adoption is still relatively limited (Figure 13) despite the development of
AI having started decades ago. Based on official US Census Bureau data collected from large scale firmlevel surveys, the Figure shows that AI is still very far from the 50% threshold of adoption across firms
which is sometimes considered a reference point for a productivity boost to become detectable in
macroeconomic data (Goldman Sachs, 2023[71]). However, since it’s mostly big companies who are
adopting AI, the share of workers exposed to AI is already large. In 2018, among US firms, 18% of workers
were in companies that adopted AI to some extent, concentrated in few cities, in sectors such as
information, healthcare, and manufacturing, and linked with advanced technologies like cloud computing
(McElheran et al., 2023[84]). Also, cross-country evidence from a number of OECD countries in 2016-2021
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100 Max
Average
Min
 29
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
reveals that AI usage is more prevalent in larger firms (Calvino and Fontanelli, 2023[45]). This study also
revealed that adoption varies with the firm’s age and productivity, with a U-shaped pattern along both
dimensions. This indicates higher adoption in younger, more entrepreneurial firms and in older, more
established ones. Adoption was also higher among firms at the productivity frontier, highlighting likely
synergies with other productivity-boosting technologies or management practices.
Figure 13. AI adoption is still limited compared to the spread of previous General Purpose
Technologies
The evolution of technology adoption (as % of firms, United States)
Note: The 2024 value for AI is the expectation (exp.) as reported by firms in the US Census Bureau survey. For more details, see the sources.
Source: For PC and electricity, (Goldman Sachs, 2023[71]); for AI, United States Census Bureau, Business Trends and Outlook Survey, updated
on 28 March 2024
Yet, alternative and more real-time sources on consumer-oriented, “user-friendly” AI suggest that adoption
is progressing very fast. For instance, the take-up rates for ChatGPT were faster than any internet app to
date – 100 million users in two months, compared to two years for Instagram and five years for Twitter
(Milmo, 2023[85]; The Economist, 2023[86]). Even though the applied use of AI technologies might benefit
from their user-friendliness, fully leveraging AI’s productivity potential still requires complementary digital
infrastructure and skills, as for earlier digital technologies (Corrado et al., 2021[87]). Indeed, AI adoption
challenges can reflect the extent to which obstacles emerge in the access to key tangible and intangible
resources. Aside from the digital backbone and storage capacity, modern AI systems require enormous
computing power and highly-specialised skills to develop and maintain them and sometimes even to use
them.
Supply of computing power (especially GPUs) is currently limited due to capacity bottlenecks (related to
high R&D and capital intensity requirements and long manufacturing cycles), strong global market
concentration and global supply chain vulnerabilities, making access especially difficult for start-ups and
small companies ((Mohammad, Elomri and Kerbache, 2022[88]; Griffith, 2023[89]; Global X, 2021[90];
30 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Haramboure et al., 2023[91]). Although many AI developers are making strong investments in this area by
building their own chip supply capacity, the market for computing power serving AI is still currently
dominated by only a few players.
Regarding skills needs, a crucial issue is how skill demand will evolve with AI's ascent and its impact on
labour market shortages and mismatches. This is particularly pressing as the rapid adoption of AI occurs
alongside tight labour markets, a situation that might be exacerbated by the ongoing shrinking of the
working-age population (Andre, Gal and Schief, 2024[92]). While there is no hard evidence available yet
about the extent of AI-related skill shortages (if any)31, lack of skills is one of the most common barriers to
adoption reported by firms in cross-country surveys (OECD, 2023[93]). This is particularly the case given
the special needs of AI related jobs: in 2022, US job vacancies requiring technical skills were almost five
times higher in top-AI than for non-AI jobs (Figure 14). Socio-emotional and foundational skills are also
more likely required in top-AI jobs.32 With AI necessitating specialised skills, both for its development and
utilisation in downstream industries, the demand for certain job roles is likely to intensify, possibly making
labour shortages more severe.33
Figure 14. AI related vacancies require more advanced technical and complementary skills
The share of online vacancies requiring specific skills, by AI-relatedness (United States, 2022)
Source: (Borgonovi et al., 2023[94]).
AI-related skill usage also appears to be characterized by very high occupational, sectoral and
geographical concentration.34 Moreover, innovation hubs where AI development and deployment thrives
often make use of non-compete contractual clauses for highly-qualified professionals, whereby a worker’s
freedom to seek jobs from competitor firms or start own-account businesses upon termination of the
contract with the current employer is (more or less severely) limited. These clauses could not only curb
entry of innovative AI-powered startups but also contribute to AI skills bottlenecks (Gibson, 2021[95]).
31 Ongoing work by the OECD Global Forum on Productivity investigates this issue.
32 This implies that a skilled traditional worker might only need a bachelor's degree, a proficient AI developer might
need to have a diverse set of skills that are usually acquired in post-tertiary education and through workplace training
and experience.
33 Other factors may act in opposite directions: AI’s capacity to replace human workers might ease the demand in
some segments of the labour market; and businesses might be more motivated to push for AI-driven automation in
sectors where labour shortages are most acute initially.
34 Occupational and sectoral concentration is documented by (Green and Lamby, 2023[96]) and (Borgonovi et al.,
2023[94]), respectively, while evidence of geographical concentration for the US was provided by (McElheran et al.,
2023[84]).
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Top AI Other AI non-AI Top AI Other AI non-AI
Technical skills Socio-emotional skills
 31
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Finally, the demand for skills for AI development and adoption can create a concentration of AI expertise
within a few large companies, which could hold back the diffusion of AI expertise across businesses and
increase performance differences across firms, with negative consequences for aggregate productivity.
Although growing fast, OECD estimates suggest that only 0.34% of the workforce possessed AI skills in
2019 (Green and Lamby, 2023[96]). The concentration of AI vacancies in specific industries hides much
larger concentration in a few firms within these industries (Figure 15). The share of jobs by top-10 AI
employers is often about half of the whole industry. Moreover, the proportion of job listings demanding AI
expertise from top employers is greater in sectors where AI job vacancies are relatively low. For instance,
in retail, less than 1% of job postings require AI skills, yet almost all of these are from the top ten AI
employers (e.g., Amazon). Patterns are similar for utilities and public administration. Thus, in these overall
less AI-exposed sectors, a few firms are still very much interested in working with the technology,
potentially foreshadowing rising performance differences within these sectors, to the extent that their efforts
to turn AI into productivity gains are successful. Data from the OECD.AI Policy Observatory complement
the picture by showing that AI skills are concentrated also across countries, with AI skills penetration (the
share of workers with AI skills) being twice as high in the US than the OECD average (Figure A.3).
Figure 15. AI skill demand is concentrated in knowledge intensive services and manufacturing
Share of AI vacancies posted by US top AI and other AI employers, by industry (2022)
Source: (Borgonovi et al., 2023[94])
4.3.2. Risks to competition, market functioning and dynamism arising from the
characteristics of AI
While widespread AI adoption is necessary for the technology to deliver broad-based productivity gains,
AI can also exacerbate competition headwinds in markets that use digital technologies and generate new
challenges for competition, market functioning and innovation incens. This in turn may backlash on the
diffusion and development of the new technology.
32 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
In this respect, two sets of concerns arise. First, AI could exacerbate challenges that have already emerged
in digital markets as the role of online platforms has grown in the economy over the past two decades
(such as search, retail and booking platforms as well as social media). These include the potentially
negative effects on firm demographics and competition of excessive market concentration, barriers to
access and abuses of market power (Costa et al., 2021[97]) (Nicoletti, Vitale and Abate, 2023[98]) (OECD,
2023[63]). Second, as AI spreads out in the economy, a number of challenges more specific to the new
technology may emerge. These are related to the potential for market distortions (e.g., due to lack of
transparency and accountability), new channels for collusion as well as innovation disincentives (e.g., due
to property rights uncertainties). 35

Market concentration and abuses of market power
AI diffusion depends on access to and competition in each of the segments of the “AI value chain”: skills
and algorithms (e.g., foundation models), data used for training, and infrastructure (computing power and
storage) (CMA, 2023[9]). In turn, access and competition would stimulate further AI innovation by
developers, facilitate the entry of new AI-using firms and may narrow productivity gaps across firms by
fostering AI adoption, for instance via lower prices and broader variety.
Yet, potentially more than with other digital technologies, AI systems embed characteristics that can lead
to both early mover advantage and market concentration, tipping and dominance, which could thwart
competition and contestability in the provision of AI services. The “scaling laws” affecting AI systems
(Kaplan et al., 2020[99]), by which the predictive performance of the models improve with their dimension –
requiring larger computing power and pre-training datasets – together with their potential to further (and
continuously) improve as they are used thanks to real time feedback loops, heighten the relevance of scale
economies and network effects of the AI technology relative to previous digital technologies. Moreover,
early experimental evidence suggests that AI-driven recommender systems, which are increasingly used
by online platforms, could be inherently conducive to market concentration and higher prices for
recommended products in downstream markets, for instance by artificially creating highly-rated “star
products” (Calvano et al., 2023[100]).
36,37
The scale of computing power and data requirements needed to meet competitive AI performance
standards provides a huge edge for AI incumbent providers through fixed costs that generate high barriers
to access for new entrants, especially if the model pre-training data is proprietary. These features favouring
market dominance are compounded by the possibility for incumbent AI providers to suffocate competition
at birth by means of “killer” acquisitions that prevent the growth of potential competitors.38 Lack of
35 For a recent overview discussing the both the risks and potential upsides from AI in the field of competition, see
(Council of Economic Advisers, 2024[8]).
36 Recommender Systems are software programs providing personalised suggestions to users/consumers about
specific items/products. These systems already orient one- to two thirds of consumer choices in leading online
platforms (Calvano et al., 2023[100]).
37 (Calvano et al., 2023[100]) conclusions are less clear cut concerning the effects on consumer surplus, as they depend
on the balance between higher prices on the one hand and lower search costs and better matching of consumer to
products on the other. The initial positive effects may turn negative as the AI algorithm draws on better and better
personalized data. This in turn may provide a further welfare-improving rationale (beyond privacy concerns) for policies
aimed at limiting access to personal data.
38 See https://www.oecd.org/daf/competition/start-ups-killer-acquisitions-and-merger-control.htm. For instance, US
competition authorities (FTC and DoJ) and the UK Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) are currently considering
whether the close partnership between Microsoft and OpenAI, a major developer of AI systems, should be considered
for a merger probe (Bloomberg, 2023). EU antitrust regulators also flagged that MS investment into OpenAI might fall
under EU merger scrutiny.
 33
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
competition in markets for AI services can slow down both AI model development, due to lack of innovation
incentives, and AI adoption downstream, due to high prices reflecting market power.
As in markets for online platform services, market dominance by AI incumbents can worsen market
outcomes (e.g., via lower output) but also generate abusive behaviour aimed at exploiting or foreclosing
competitors in vertically (or horizontally) related markets when AI developers are also AI-powered suppliers
in such markets. A typical example would be self-preferencing, where AI-driven recommender systems
would orient customers towards products supplied by the incumbent AI-powered provider at the expense
of competitors (e.g., a large retail platform developing its own AI to achieve this). Competitors may have
little market alternatives if competition in AI development and supply is not thriving and, as for digital
platforms, they may find themselves captive due to high switching costs or lack of interoperability that may
hinder the move from one AI system to the other.
While barriers to access and the potential for abuses generated by market concentration are a real
concern, some features of AI development and use suggest that complex forces are at work in AI
markets.39 For instance, the development of open-source competitors (such as Mistral, in France, and
Aleph Alpha, in Germany) to leading commercial Generative AI models and, more generally, the diffusion
of such open-source alternatives for more specialized AI tasks could limit in the future the market power
of incumbents.
Market distortions
One way in which the impact of AI on growth and welfare could be reduced by distorted market outcomes
is through using AI to automate excessively, especially by “so-so automation” (Acemoglu and Restrepo,
2019[101]; Acemoglu and Johnson, 2023[102]). This use of AI may have limited direct effects on productivity
(because it typically replaces low-skilled workers) and potentially damaging effects on consumers, either
by lowering product quality or by shifting costs onto them. Typical examples are self check-out counters in
stores or automated customer services. Too much human-labour focused automation, without considering
impacts on consumers, may be driven by herd behaviour (“fads”) in management practices.40 However, if
such automations are well implemented and lead to more reliable and quicker service provision, they may
save time and lead to better quality services for consumers thus freeing up their time.
AI also risks reducing aggregate efficiency and welfare outcomes if it is used to influence consumer
behaviour in undesirable directions.41 While the possibility that data intelligence is used to manipulate
consumers has been recognised for a long time, machine learning algorithms can bring the impact of these
business strategies to another level.
A first such distorting channel is AI’s potential for the exploitation of well-known cognitive biases that cause
deviations from consumer rational behaviour. For instance, a study argues that AI-powered marketing can
exploit optimism biases, information overload, anchoring, confirmation, and framing highly effectively and
at large scale,42 to twist consumer demand towards low-quality or harmful products (Calo, 2013[103]). The
39 In financial markets, risks of herding and one-way markets due to the use of very similar AI models could also have
detrimental impacts on stability.
40 Alternatively, it could be seen as responding to longer term business strategies aimed at boosting collection of
personalised data on customers (Brown, 2019[203]).
41 Related work is being undertaken by the OECD’s Committee on Consumer Policy. In particular, potentially
problematic commercial practices will be discussed at the October 2024 Ministerial Meeting of this committee.
42 See Hanson and Kysar (1999) for a survey of these known biases studied in behavioural economics experiments.
Specifically, AI driven by machine learning can identify such consumer vulnerabilities thanks to its ability to predict
anomalous consumer behavior and design personalised targeting almost in real time. Calo (2014) reports that socalled “sucker lists” of vulnerable consumers are already traded in the open market.
34 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
resulting market manipulation might represent a novel source of market failure possibly leading to
inefficient (or otherwise objectionable) economic outcomes.43 A related source of potential behavioural
manipulation is the informational advantage of AI-driven platforms over consumers concerning the
“glossiness” (as opposed to the quality) of the products they supply (Acemoglu, Malekian and Ozdaglar,
2023b[104]). Depending on the persistence of such (non-rational) glossiness factors, the use of AI can help
platforms to extract consumer surplus and increase profits at the expense of overall welfare.
A second potentially distorting channel is the formidable opportunity that AI-powered companies have to
discriminate across consumers by setting close to personalised prices for identical products. While price
discrimination in itself can improve both static and dynamic efficiency, it can also lead to exploitative and
exclusionary practices when it is coupled with the strong market dominance that characterises many digital
markets (OECD, 2018[105]). Particularly, in online markets customers have no information on the way their
personalised prices compare to those applied to other customers and this asymmetry of information,
coupled with market power, can be used by AI-powered platforms to set prices that penalise certain
consumers or foreclose rival suppliers on the same platform (Li, Philipsen and Cauffman, 2023[106]).
44

Finally, a third channel of market distortions is related to the (as yet unsolved) issue of accountability (and
potential liability) for AI-driven business actions. The question is who among AI developers, AI users, and
beneficiaries of AI actions should be held accountable and liable for decisions that might be taken
autonomously by advanced AI systems with potentially high-risk outcomes (e.g., self-driving vehicles).
These decisions can have consequences for market outcomes (e.g., negative effects on competition or on
consumers) for which responsibility needs to be attributed in order to find remedies and correct the
distortions they might originate. Yet, the more AI acts autonomously, the weaker the links between the
agent (the AI system) and its principal(s) (the humans instructing or developing the AI system), putting into
question the liability of the individuals or firms who benefit from the algorithm’s autonomous decisions
(OECD, 2017[107]). Recent research shows that, in the absence of any liability system, AI development with
uncertain welfare consequences tends to exceed what would be socially desirable, causing negative
externalities (Guerreiro, Rebelo and Teles, 2023[108]). Yet, defining AI accountability goals, processes and
enforcement tools is challenging, not least because of the problem of pinpointing individual responsibilities
in systems that involve multiple actors and resources (Novelli, Taddeo and Floridi, 2023[109]).
45

Collusion – and how to prove it
Aside from more traditional channels, risks of collusion among AI developers and users relate especially
to (i) algorithmic pricing (AP) and (ii) AI governance arrangements among developers.
The use of AP, whereby firms set prices according to predetermined rules that account for the reaction of
competitors, has been quite common in several markets for quite some time already. This was generally
done via adaptive mechanisms whose underlying models needed to be coded by humans (Calvano et al.,
2020[110]), implying that collusion intent could in principle be detected and sanctioned. Examples of AP use
range from air travel, finance, insurance and accommodation to large online retail platforms, where up to
two thirds of service providers used such algorithms already in 2017 (OECD, 2017[107])
46

43 The economic costs arising from behavioural manipulation have been termed “internalities” to distinguish them from
more familiar economic externalities (Herrnstein et al., 1993).
44 For instance, price discrimination can be used by platforms to implement and sustain exclusionary predatory
practices, by reducing the profits foregone during the period in which predated rivals remain in the market.
45 (OECD, 2023[124]) provides a framework for AI accountability design. An early practical attempt at defining an
accountability system is the EU AI Act agreed by EU Council and Parliament in December 2023.
46 Despite their large use, only a limited number of AP-induced collusion cases have been detected by competition
authorities so far (Calvano et al., 2020[110]).
 35
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
AI-powered AP opens up several new possibilities to collude, including prominently (and safely) by
facilitating tacit collusion (OECD, 2021[111]) (OECD, 2023[112]). Under certain conditions, the interaction
between AI-driven AP and recommender systems can also further tacit collusive outcomes (Xingchen, Lee
and Tan, 2023[113]). This kind of collusive behaviour is pernicious because it cannot be addressed easily
by authorities enforcing competition laws that are based on the principle of the “meeting of minds” as a
proof of intent.47 The increasing use of machine-learning algorithms, in which price adjustments are driven
autonomously by self-learning AI without building on an explicit economic model, makes collusive
outcomes possible even without the explicit intervention of humans (Calvano et al., 2020[110]). AI-powered
AP can sustain collusion by facilitating the monitoring of competitors and the implementation of parallel
pricing practices as well as by lowering the cost of signaling for cartel members (OECD, 2017[107]).
Under certain conditions, such algorithms may have a comparative advantage over humans in solving
coordination issues inherent to collusive behaviour (such as agreement on collusion desired outcomes and
punishment mechanisms in case of breaches), though views differ on this (Schwalbe, 2018[114]).
48 Indeed,
experimental evidence suggests that tacit collusive outcomes resulting from interactions between AP
systems based on machine learning can be quite robust (Calvano et al., 2020[110]; Klein, 2021[115]), even
though the extent of supracompetitive pricing still depends on a number of factors, including market
structure, algorithm design and heterogeneity in algorithms used by market players (Sanchez-Cartas and
Katsamakas, 2022[116]).
49 The little empirical evidence currently available on pricing outcomes under AP,
which focuses mostly on markets with many players, provides conflicting results (Musolff, 2022[117]; Assad
et al., 2020[118]).
All in all, the diffusion of AI-powered AP poses difficult challenges for policy makers and competition
authorities not only because collusive outcomes (if any) are reached tacitly but also because they may
have to be examined on a case-by-case basis since their likelihood depends on details such as the degree
of heterogeneity of adopted algorithms, the type of algorithms used and the structure of markets. Moreover,
the potential harm to consumers caused by higher than competitive prices has to be weighed against the
possible benefits consumers may reap from AP, e.g., in terms of better service or product availability
(Sanchez-Cartas and Katsamakas, 2022[116]), or cost reductions in sales departments reflected in prices,
quicker reactions of firms to improved supply conditions and lower search costs as their willingness to pay
is estimated more accurately.
AI governance arrangements, including prominently the establishment of cooperation among large AI
developers, are generally deemed to be necessary to ensure that AI systems will develop in a welfare
improving direction (G7, 2023[119]). Cooperation among developers can also be used to mitigate the
broader societal risks (e.g., related to safety, security, privacy and unbiasedness) that could arise by
unfettered development and use of AI systems.50 Various forms of cooperation have been suggested
(Brundage et al., 2020[120])– such as pooling research efforts on socially beneficial AI applications,
exchange of information (e.g., about model advances and pitfalls, ways to debias model results, etc.), the
setting of common standards (e.g., for internal auditing mechanisms or for ensuring interoperability) or
even ways to prevent harmful technological race dynamics via an “Assist Clause” (OpenAI, 2018[121])and
47 Indeed, aside from exceptional circumstances, tacit collusion generally falls outside the scope of competition laws.
48 A related, but as yet little explored, issue is to what extent these comparative advantages also make it easier to
collude even in markets that do not enjoy the typical conditions that are conducive to collusion: price transparency,
homogeneous products and few market players (see OECD, 2017, for a discussion).
49 Interestingly, other authors show that under fairly general conditions the use of AP in otherwise competitive markets
leads to supracompetitive pricing even the absence of tacit collusion (Brown and MacKay, 2023[204]).
50 For instance, Partnership on AI (PAI), which gathers virtually all the large players in the AI field (including all major
developers), explicitly aims at cooperating “so developments in AI advance positive outcomes for people and society”,
notably by providing a forum for exchanging best practices and setting voluntary standards.
36 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
sharing excessive profits in case of extreme market concentration via a “Windfall Clause” (O’Keefe et al.,
2020[122]).
51
However, by allowing and promoting interactions among developers, these arrangements can also
facilitate various forms of collusive outcomes, possibly leading to weaker market dynamism, less
innovation incentives and lower aggregate productivity growth. For instance, evidence shows that the
Assist Clause amounts to commitment from one firm to not compete with another, which may be in contrast
with EU competition laws; similarly, various forms of exchanges between competing AI developers (such
as mutual monitoring, advance notice of technological advances, etc.) could be used to share sensitive
commercial information to enforce collusive agreements; and even standard setting could endanger
competition to the extent that it can be used to foreclose competitors (Hua and Belfield, 2020[123]).
Innovation disincentives
While AI can be a powerful source of innovation that holds the potential to durably sustain growth, some
features of this technology and the market context that it promotes can limit its innovative drive. Aghion et
al. (2015) stressed that thriving competition and protection of intellectual property rights (IPR) are
complementary drivers of innovation. As argued above, there are good reasons to expect that AI-driven
market outcomes might be inherently characterised by rising market concentration and weak market
contestability, which in itself could limit the innovative contribution of new firm entry and competitive
pressures.
On the IPR side, the development and use of AI also raises several concerns. First, AI development
requires pretraining AI models on massive amounts of data that can be partly found on the web, which are
often covered by copyrights and whose use has generally not been authorised by right owners. As expert
discussions and legal suits around the concept of AI “fair use” suggest,52 the legal status of the data used
to train AI models is still an unsettled issue and judicial developments concerning copyrights issues could
have important repercussions on the type of data barriers faced by AI model developers, providing more
or less importance to proprietary data. While it is still unclear whether such pre-training use actually
infringes copyrights,53 it risks lowering incentives for creators and inventors in a range of industries.
Research on possible copyrights regimes that might preserve at the same time the welfare benefits of AI
development as well as business or innovation incentives for both AI developers and content providers is
still scant.54
Second, it is yet unclear how possible creations or inventions generated autonomously by AI will be
protected (if at all) by IPR. The current approach in major patenting offices is to reject attribution of patents
or copyrights to the AI systems that generated them (OECD, 2023[124]). This could discourage either the
design of AI for innovative purposes or the licensing of discoveries, limiting AI-driven innovation and the
51 OpenAI’s “Assist Clause” aims at preventing technological races that could privilege the acquisition of competitive
edge over the search for adequate safety precautions: developers would commit to pause their own research and turn
to assisting research of any developer that made significant frontier advances towards Artificial General Intelligence
(AGI). In the same (but more extreme) spirit a letter undersigned by several AI stakeholders and experts in 2023
proposed to completely pause AI development for six months.
52 Fair use is a legal principle that allows the use of copyrighted material in certain limited cases without fee or even
credit. Recently, the New York Times has sued Microsoft for the alleged infringement of copyrights related to the use
of millions of NYT articles for training ChatGPT, claiming that this does not fall under the “fair use” limits.
53 For instance, OECD work argues that such use might not infringe US laws as long as the AI output is sufficiently
different from the copyrighted material on which it was trained (OECD, 2023[33]).
54 Some scholars argue that an “ex post fair use” regime for large AI models, in which pretraining on copyrighted data
is allowed but content providers preserve the right to ask for compensation if they can demonstrate significant
commercial damage, could achieve these twin purposes (Gans, 2024[186]).
 37
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
related knowledge spillovers on the economy. Finally, the use of AI systems could also facilitate the reverse
engineering of innovative products and technologies (Aghion, Jones and Jones, 2018[73]). While this could
help diffusing frontier knowledge through imitation, it could also discourage innovation due to excessive
expropriation of innovators via increased competition. 55

4.3.3. Upside risks from AI diffusion on competition and market dynamism
Characteristics of AI do not necessarily all entail “downside” risks to competition. A number of “upside
risks” may be at work as well with the spread of AI, although they are generally less widely discussed (a
very recent brief overview is provided by (Council of Economic Advisers, 2024[8])). For instance, AI may
boost productivity-enhancing competitive pressures and innovation via market disruptions by new entrants,
for example if they rely to a greater extent on open-source rather than proprietary models. As already
mentioned, open-source models are developing fast and may represent soon valid alternatives to
commercial models, which would strengthen competition in AI markets. AI models may also improve
technologically in the sense of limiting the dependence on scaling laws (e.g., if models are made more
parsimonious) and big data (e.g., if pre-training becomes possible on “synthetic” datasets). Finally, and
most directly relevant for aggregate productivity, AI may boost knowledge spillovers across the economy
and as such help with the catch-up of productivity laggards. Early evidence on the performance-equalising
effect of Generative AI in some tasks (see Sections 3 and 5.1) points into this direction.
5. Key challenges and opportunities related to inequality and inclusion
While AI has the potential to significantly raise overall productivity and result in stronger economic growth,
such an outcome would not necessarily result in shared prosperity. Indeed, over the past four decades,
automation and the resulting increase in productivity – which have moderated recently – have coincided
with a decline in the labour share of income, increases in inequality and a polarisation of income
distributions within countries across the world (Karabarbounis, 2023[125]; Acemoglu and Loebbing, 2022[126];
OECD, 2019[127]; Autor, Levy and Murnane, 2003[128]).
The ultimate distributional effects of AI will depend on a series of factors. These include (i) the extent to
which AI will substitute or complement labour at different points of the income distribution and the resulting
effects on wages, (ii) the effect on the level of overall employment, (iii) AI’s potential to improve economic
mobility through improvements in education or access to credit, (iv) AI’s effects on market concentration,
and (v) whether AI exacerbates the decline in labour’s share of income.
5.1. Inequality in the labour market
AI will affect workers differently depending on their occupational exposure to the technology and the extent
to which it will automate or augment their work. The extent and nature of the exposure to AI in different
occupations could in turn determine its effects on labour demand and wages. In the case of industrial
robots, for example, (Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2020[129]) find negative effects on wages in the occupations
most exposed to robotisation. For a given occupation, higher potential for automation by AI is likely to have
a negative effect on wages and labour demand, while augmentation may have the opposite effects.
While in the past automation has replaced routine tasks, Generative AI can now perform tasks requiring
creativity, oral and written comprehension, and inductive reasoning. Occupations involving high-stakes
decisions such as doctors or judges are more likely to be augmented by AI than fully automated (see
Section 4.2.2, and Figure 10). Higher-skilled occupations including business professionals, managers,
55 (Council of Economic Advisers, 2024[8]) also cautions that AI’s anticompetitive effects may materialise not only
through price outcomes but also via dampening longer-run innovation and product quality.
38 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
science and engineering professionals and legal, social, and cultural professionals are also more exposed
(Eloundou et al., 2023[130]) (OECD, 2023[57]).
56 Forthcoming OECD research on exposure by sociodemographic characteristics also suggests that university-educated male, prime-age and native-born
workers are among the most exposed to AI (Lane, 2024[131]). Importantly, these initial findings are likely to
change because, as AI technology evolves (which has been occurring at a rapid pace), it will likely be able
to perform an increasing number of tasks. For example, the coupling of ever more sophisticated robotics
technology with AI could result in the technology being able to perform a growing number of physical tasks
as well. However, at this stage, initial evidence also suggests that full automation of complete occupations
is not yet an immediate risk, especially if the jobs themselves are being redesigned to take advantage of
AI capabilities. As stressed by (Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2014[132]): “AI won’t replace managers, but
managers who use AI will replace managers who don’t use AI”.
The few studies that have evaluated the productivity impact of Generative AI suggest that lower-skilled or
less-experienced workers receive a stronger productivity boost from AI use than more experienced
workers, which could lead to a compression of the income distribution. For example, access to an AI-based
conversational tool has been found to increase the productivity of novice or low-skilled customer support
agents by 34%, while the impact on more experienced or highly-skilled workers was minimal (Brynjolfsson,
Li and Raymond, 2023[50]). Inequality between workers that were assigned professional writing tasks
decreased after randomly exposing half of them to ChatGPT, with increases in average productivity and
output quality (Noy and Zhang, 2023[52]). Interestingly, both these studies also found that job satisfaction
rose after exposure to Generative AI tools. Other studies found similar results among software developers
(Peng et al., 2023[51]) and consultants (Dell’Acqua et al., 2023[53]). These results provide evidence of an
equalising effect of Generative AI within specific occupations, but such equalising effects may not apply
across occupations. For instance, using an online experiment with a representative sample of the UK
working-age population, (Haslberger, Gingrich and Bhatia, 2023[54]) have shown that while ChatGPT
reduced performance inequality within occupations, it did not do so across occupations or levels of
education (Haslberger, Gingrich and Bhatia, 2023[54]). This finding is consistent with forthcoming OECD
research suggesting that while AI has not yet affected wage inequality between occupations, it is
associated with lower wage inequality within occupations (Georgieff, forthcoming[133]).
The potential for widening inequalities in the aggregate economy as opposed to an equalising effect within
occupations is also reflected in studies evaluating the effects of AI (mostly non-Generative, at this point)
using machine learning methods. For example, a study documenting the dramatic increase in demand for
AI skills (based on the presence in job postings of words associated with knowledge of AI) finds large wage
premiums for jobs that require AI skills, with managerial occupations benefiting from the highest wage
premiums (Alekseeva et al., 2020[134]), although the proportion of jobs requiring AI skills still remains low
overall. (Felten, Raj and Seamans, 2019[135]) also find a stronger positive effect of AI exposure for higherincome occupations, while (Fossen and Sorgner, 2022[136]) find that the link between AI exposure and
employment stability is strongest for more educated workers. To the extent that AI widens or narrows
performance gaps across firms, this will also have an impact on cross-firm wage inequality, given the
strong relationship identified between the two phenomena (Criscuolo et al., 2020[137]). Finally, a crosscountry study using aggregate AI investment and income inequality found that investment in AI is
56 Some recent country-specific analysis in the US confirm that most exposed occupations are not only high skill but
also high income ones, even if also mid and low income occupations report high exposure, so that the forecasted net
effect on inequality is unclear (Council of Economic Advisers, 2024[8]). A French study also shows that AI can raise
employment, on average (complementarity effect), in firms adopting AI but can have negative effects on mid- and low
skill professions (Artificial Intelligence Commission of France, 2024[184]).
 39
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
associated with higher overall income inequality over the 2010-2019 period (Cornelli, Frost and Mishra,
2023[138]).
57
.
An important question when considering the impact of AI on inequality is its ultimate effect on overall
employment, given that unemployment is a major contributor to income inequality (see for example
(Hacibedel et al., 2020[139]). Dramatic increases in productivity and widespread automation could lead to
mass unemployment unless demand rises sufficiently in response to lower prices and higher product
quality of the output of AI-exposed activities (Bessen, 2018[140]). Demand may also grow in other, less AIexposed and human labour intensive activities on the back of rising incomes (see Baumol’s disease in
Section 4.1). Yet another potential way in which employment may be preserved or increased is the possible
creation of new tasks, as has been the case with past technological advances (Acemoglu and Restrepo,
2018[141]; Autor et al., 2022[142]) (Autor, 2024[69]). For example, while the car industry experienced
widespread automation starting in the 1910s, the new production methods also introduced a wide range
of new design, technical, machine-operation and clerical tasks, leading to higher demand for workers
(Acemoglu and Johnson, 2023[102]). A study predating Generative AI suggests that firms adopting AI
technologies changed their mix of job skill requirements in jobs not requiring AI technical skills, suggesting
an impact of AI adoption on non-AI tasks and ambiguous aggregate employment effects given the
technologies limited use so far (Acemoglu et al., 2022[143]).
AI also has the potential to exacerbate a secular trend in the distribution of income between labour and
capital. The labour share of income has steadily declined in the United States and most OECD countries,
with the headline estimate for the world declining around 6 percentage points between 1980 and 2022,
and studies have suggested this was in large part due to technology (Karabarbounis, 2023[125]). AI-driven
automation may continue this trend, raising the share of income earned by capital, and, to the extent that
capital ownership is concentrated, leading to higher income and wealth inequality as dividends and interest
income accrue to owners of capital (Trammell and Korinek, 2023[144]; Piketty, 2014[145]). The potential for
an increasing concentration of AI resources (data, hardware and talent, as discussed in the previous
sections) could exacerbate these effects on wealth inequality as AI capital becomes increasingly held by
a few firms and shareholders. Stronger concentration of resources could also result in widening regional
disparities given that AI hubs tend to be geographically concentrated (Muro and Liu, 2021[146]). Finally, if
the capital share of income rises further, the erosion of the tax base may become more important, as the
effective tax rate on capital has steadily declined in high-income countries (Zucman et al., 2022[147]).
5.2. AI’s impact on economic mobility
AI has the potential to improve educational outcomes and advance human learning by helping personalise
teaching and training, raising the quality of teaching, and democratising knowledge (Baker, 2021[148]).
Given the importance of the quality of education for economic mobility and its impact on future earnings
(Chetty, Friedman and Rocko, 2014[149]; Autor, Goldin and Katz, 2020[150]), the rising use of AI in education
and training could reduce disparities in economic outcomes and compress the income distribution.
However, widespread and affordable access to AI will be necessary for such an outcome to occur, and
there are risks that AI may also decrease the inclusiveness of learning systems if appropriate safeguards
are not put in place (OECD, 2023[57]).
As reported in the PISA 2022 report (OECD, 2023[124]), socio-economically disadvantaged students are
significantly less likely to achieve basic proficiency in mathematics, science and reading. This gap could
widen if socio-economically disadvantaged students benefit less from AI due to the lack of digital skills or
resources. Socio-economically disadvantaged schools are more likely than advantaged schools to suffer
from shortages in material resources, including digital resources (OECD, 2023[124]), with 17% of the
57 This may not be a causal relationship and could be driven by confounding factors that impact both outcomes and
which are challenging to control for in a macroeconomic setting.
40 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
variation in student performance accounted for by differences in access to digital resources. An additional
concern is that future heavy reliance on AI could prevent students from developing cognitive abilities and
the capacity for critical thinking. While it is still too early to find evidence of such an effect, such a risk could
inform decisions on educational curricula and modes of teaching.
By augmenting their abilities, AI can help workers perform tasks requiring higher levels of expertise, raising
their earnings and improving economic mobility. On the other hand, if it were to replace entire occupations
or large segments of entry-level occupations (see again (Brynjolfsson, Li and Raymond, 2023[6])), AI could
have the effect of “removing rungs from the professional ladder”, negatively impacting mobility.
AI also has the potential to expand access to credit, thereby increasing upward mobility and reducing
income inequality (Delis, Fringuellotti and Ongena, 2023[151]). Studies suggest that automated underwriting
can lead to higher borrower approval rates, particularly for underserved applicants (Gates, Perry and Zorn,
2002[152]), and that advances in digital financial technology and machine learning can reduce the cost of
credit, boost productivity of downstream sectors (Bontadini et al., 2024[153]) and increase financial inclusion
(Bazarbash, 2019[154]; Boukherouaa et al., 2021[155]). The potential for expanded access to credit also
comes with new challenges, however, including risks of bias and discrimination, data and privacy risks,
and the potential for increased volatility and systemic risks in financial markets (Gensler, 2023[156]) (OECD,
2023[63]). For instance, AI-based credit scoring models were found to be 5-10% less accurate for lower
income and minority households (Blattner and Nelson, 2021[157]).
5.3. AI and the inclusiveness of disadvantaged groups
AI has the potential to improve the inclusiveness of disadvantaged groups in the labour market and thus
partially offset rising demographic challenges due to declining working age populations (Andre, Gal and
Schief, 2024[92]), but it also poses risks (OECD, 2023[57]). In an OECD survey conducted in 2022 (before
breakthroughs in Generative AI), employers in the manufacturing and finance sectors responded that
workers with disabilities are more likely to be helped by AI, while older and lower-skilled workers are more
likely to be harmed by it (Lane, Williams and Broecke, 2023[56]). AI could further widen gender inequalities
if its benefits are larger in occupations in which men are over-represented, or if existing biases are
engrained in AI-assisted hiring processes. In the same survey, men who had used AI at work were more
likely than women to respond that it improved their productivity or their working conditions. Further
evidence on gender gaps in AI talent – in research, development and use alike – also point to large
disparities (Caira et al., 2023[158]).
Assistive AI-powered technologies such as vision-to-language tools and auto-captioning already make
work environments more accessible and inclusive for people with disabilities (OECD, 2022[159]; Touzet,
2023[160]), and these technologies will continue improving. AI also has the potential to greatly improve
rehabilitation, with large implications for the labour force. Indeed, people with disability represent about
18% of the working age population, while their employment rate is 27 percentage points lower than for
people without disability, and they are more than twice as likely to be unemployed than non-disabled
people.58
However, for the integration of people with disabilities into the labour market to be widely improved, access
to AI-powered technologies and the ability to benefit from them must be widespread. Across the OECD,
people with disabilities are more likely to lack the prerequisites to use most assistive technologies, such
as digital skills or access to digital technology and a stable and fast internet connection, which could limit
the extent to which they benefit from AI and further widen disparities. AI technologies may also be less
58 Data on disability share are for aged 15-69, on average across the OECD and between 2016 and 2019. Data on
employment rates are from 2019.
 41
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
adapted to certain socio-economic groups due to the nature of the training data, which may not properly
reflect their experiences, or because AI applications are not designed with their needs and abilities in mind.
AI may also have implications for gender and minority groups discriminations. While commercial use of AIassisted facial recognition algorithms and AI-assisted recruitment procedures can benefit companies, jobseekers and consumers, they also involve ethical issues and high risks of discrimination that could have
consequences for the economic inclusion of disadvantaged groups, including women and minorities
(especially people of colour) (Buolamwini, 2023[161]) (Ramos, Squicciarini and Lamm, 2024[162]). For
instance, facial recognition algorithms have been shown higher rates of failures for non-white individuals
(Buolamwini and Raji, 2019[163]) and image-generating AI have been shown to amplify societal stereotypes
on women and minorities (Luccioni et al., 2023[164]; Nicoletti and Bass, 2023[165]). Similarly, AI-assisted
recruitment procedures have proved vulnerable to “algorithmic statistical discrimination” (Jackson,
2021[166]; Chen, 2023[167]) against minorities due to inaccuracies in the design of the algorithms or the
nature of the datasets on which the AI models are trained. Finally, use of AI screening systems in the
provision of financial services (e.g., credit) could also generate or aggravate biases and discriminations
(OECD, 2021[168]). These pitfalls of AI systems point to the need to require transparency in their use, to
submit them to various forms of internal and external auditing before their real-world application and to
continuously monitor their performance in order to avoid unintended negative effects on inclusion.59
5.4. AI’s impact across countries
There are concerns that AI technologies may have different impacts across countries and have the
potential to widen cross-country differences in GDP per capita. On the one hand, there are the direct
benefits of national technology development, which are cause for concern given that AI development is
heavily concentrated in a few countries, such as the United States and China. This is exemplified, for
instance, by the large disparities in the size of cumulative venture capital investments in AI, totalling nearly
USD 450 billion in the United States, less than half of that in China, and only around USD 50 billion in the
EU (OECD.AI, 2024).
60 On the other hand, to the extent that AI will be a labour- and resource-saving
technology, this may devalue the comparative advantage of developing countries and worsen their terms
of trade (Korinek, Schindler and Stiglitz, 2021[169]). This phenomenon is developed in a theoretical model
by (Alonso et al., 2020[170]), which suggests that higher wages in advanced countries lead to a greater
adoption of higher-productivity “robots” or AI. The resulting higher productivity in turn pulls capital from
developing to developed countries. As AI replaces unskilled workers, their wages decline and goods and
services are produced more cheaply, leading to worsening terms of trade for developing countries.
Relatedly, differences in the extent and nature of labour market exposure to AI across countries will entail
different impacts of AI. Studies evaluating the occupational structure of labour markets in advanced
economies (including the UK and the US) and emerging markets (including Brazil, Colombia, India and
South Africa) find that while the advanced economies exhibit a higher exposure to AI given their higher
share of employment in high-skilled jobs that are highly exposed to AI, exposed workers in advanced
economies are more likely to be complemented rather than replaced by AI (Cazzaniga et al., 2024[80]). The
emerging markets in the study are less exposed to AI, but they also have a smaller proportion of workers
with the potential for complementarity. Due to these differences, AI may deliver stronger and more
imminent productivity growth in developed rather than developing countries, but labour market disruptions
are also likely to be larger.
59 These issues have spurred a strand of research on the ethics of AI-based or AI-assisted recruitment (Mujtaba and
Mahapatra, 2019[205]; Hunkenschroer and Luetge, 2022[206]).
60 https://oecd.ai/en/data?selectedArea=investments-in-ai-and-data&selectedVisualization=vc-investments-in-ai-bycountry
42 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
The adoption of AI technologies may also differ greatly across the world for other reasons, leading to further
differences in its impacts. As mentioned above, lower wages in developing countries may reduce the
incentives for adopting AI to automate certain tasks, which could slow adoption. More fundamentally,
prerequisites for AI adoption such as digital infrastructure (including data storage and computing power
(hardware), stable internet connections, digital skills, literacy and numeracy, and general familiarity with
data and algorithms may be less prevalent in developing countries, thereby limiting adoption (Björkegren
and Blumenstock, 2023[171]). Differences in adoption rates across countries could mean that the
productivity benefits of AI will be unequal across countries.
Another reason for which AI may have a different impact across countries is that AI technologies, which
are predominantly developed by companies in advanced countries largely using training data from a
developed-country context, may not fit the social and institutional context in other countries (Björkegren
and Blumenstock, 2023[171]). A straightforward example is that large language models perform better in
English, in part due to the large amount of available relevant data, than in other languages for which a
smaller corpus of digitised text exists and that may have a very different linguistic structure compared to
English (Lai et al., 2023[172]). AI technologies may be less applicable, and their benefits may be smaller in
developing countries given the relative lack of training data and the fact that AI developers may not
consider applications beyond their own societal and economic context. This effect could be exacerbated
by the risks of elevated concentration in the AI service provider market described in section 4.3, with the
potential for the market dominance of a few companies in selected developed countries.
Finally, improvements in AI-powered technologies such as instant translation raise the potential for
“telemigration” (Baldwin, 2020[173]), allowing more workers in developing countries to work for companies
based in higher-income countries despite not speaking the language, for example. While this provides
more opportunities for workers in lower-income countries, it could also affect labour markets in higherincome countries where such services “off-shoring” will occur extensively. Nevertheless, results of gravity
models suggest that the benefits of telemigration are unlikely to be transformative when it comes to the
development paths of most emerging economies (Baldwin and Dingel, 2021[174]).
6. Economic challenges as a result of broader societal risks
Previous sections highlighted several key benefits but also challenges and risks from AI with potentially
strong economic repercussions. This contrast is also reflected in the perception of AI by the general public:
according to an OECD survey, 35% of adults reported being concerned that AI would primarily harm people
in the next two decades, while 42% believed it would primarily benefit people (OECD, 2023[175]). Most
widely cited challenges include: concerns related to privacy, misinformation and reaching singularity or
AGI, along with the associated existential risks.61
First, in many applications, AI relies on a collection, and possibly, a combination, of various data sources.
These can lead to – or perceived to be linked to – an increased risk of intrusion to privacy in various fields,
such as medical diagnosis, workplace surveillance, public sector applications (Dougherty, 2024[176]) and
so on.
Second, the widespread use of AI generated content, and AI assisted decisions provided by an un-safe –
that is, either not trustworthy, or biased, or outright malignant – AI can further contribute to misinformation
in several domains. If AI generated content is not reliable – as is sometimes the case notably with LLMs
given their tendency to “hallucinate” (Lorenz, Perset and Berryhill, 2023[15]) (Perez-Cruz and Shin, 2024[78])
(OECD, 2023[79]) – this makes information collecting and processing ultimately more noisy and costly,
negatively impacting knowledge accumulation and sharing in science and research (producing fake studies
61 Ongoing work by the OECD expert group on AI Futures as well as a forthcoming chapter of the OECD Digital
Economy Outlook discuss these ares in more detail.
 43
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
with fabricated results, see Figure A.4). This may also impact the reliability of marketing information about
products and services, and more generally, the nature of public discourse about actual events and news.
More generally, an AI-powered further proliferation of distorted information can undermine democracy.
These features may exacerbate existing challenges related to the practices of large digital platforms
underlying marketplaces and social media. Moreover, as AI generated information gets picked up in the
training of the next generation of AI models, such distortions can accumulate over time and make them
even more problematic. Distortions in the datasets used for AI training can also have serious repercussions
on economic discrimination of disadvantaged social groups (see section 5.3).
Third, a probably longer-term challenge stems from reaching a level of AI that surpasses human
capabilities, including the possibility for radical self-improvement (Nordhaus, 2021[177]) (Jones, 2023[39]).
Such advanced capabilities may form a technological singularity62 and could eventually lead to a runaway
technological process that humans cannot control or contain. At that point, the alignment problem –
whether the ultimate goals of AI are beneficial for humanity – becomes critical (Bostrom, 2014[178]). A very
capable AI, that is able to channel resources to its needs but that is not well aligned with the initial goals
can lead to existential risks for humanity and may justify slowing down or tightly regulating its development
(Jones, 2023[39]; Suleyman and Bhaskar, 2023[179]).
A less threatening but still extreme outcome could be that all – or nearly all – occupations become fully
automated and taken over by AI, rendering human labour obsolete and dispensable in economic terms
thus leading to mass unemployment (Acemoglu and Lensman, 2023[38]). Even if large-scale redistribution
could sustain adequate income levels – despite difficulties in achieving it in a global context –, or an AI
powered bounty of freely available services and goods may make incomes unnecessary, such an eventual
outcome would still pose enormous challenges during the transition towards such a state.
These risks, directly or indirectly, can also limit AI’s economic benefits and welfare gains through various
means, such as promoting backlashes which can result in efforts to hold back AI development and adoption
even for beneficial uses To address this wide range of looming risks, the impact of AI development and
use on these aspects require close monitoring, even from a purely economic standpoint, let alone for
broader societal reasons.
7. Policy discussion
The recent rapid evolution of AI and its potential consequences discussed in this paper have spurred a
debate on the appropriate policy responses among academics, civil society, and policymakers across the
world (Autor et al., 2022[142]; Korinek and Stiglitz, 2021[180]; Lorenz, Perset and Berryhill, 2023[181];
Acemoglu and Johnson, 2023[182]) (Coyle, 2023[183]) (Artificial Intelligence Commission of France, 2024[184])
(Council of Economic Advisers, 2024[8]). The OECD has been at the forefront of shaping the policy
discussions around technical, legal and regulatory challenges led in particular by the OECD Policy
Observatory (OECD.AI). It culminated in the creation and wide acceptance of the OECD AI Principles
(OECD, 2019[1]) adhered to by 46 countries and continuously monitored in the Policy Observatory. They
include, as values based principles, i) inclusive growth, sustainable development and wellbeing, ii) humancentred values and fairness, iii) transparency and explicability, iv) robustness, security and safety, and v)
accountability; as well as the following recommendations for policy makers: i) investing in AI R&D, ii)
fostering a digital ecosystem, iii) shaping and enabling policy environment, iv) building human capacity and
preparing for labour market transformation, v) international co-operation for trustworthy AI (see more
details in Table A.1).63
62 See definition in footnote 9.
63 See also https://oecd.ai/en/dashboards/ai-principles/P12
44 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Building on these efforts, further steps are needed to continue the global dialogue and forge a consensus
on how to address many of the remaining most important challenges related to AI development and use.
This debate is complicated by the rapid pace of the technology’s development and the extreme uncertainty
over the future capabilities of AI and its implications, highlighting the relevance of developing and promptly
updating guiding principles for policy in light of further breakthroughs. Another challenge relates to the
possibility that individual countries will not be able to control the global evolution of AI-related technologies,
pointing to the need for international cooperation and agreement on these principles.
Since the adoption of the AI Principles, and also informed by them, notable recent progress has been
made in this area, including through the Hiroshima AI Process. In that context, G7 leaders agreed on
guiding principles and a code of conduct for developing AI systems, in cooperation with the OECD and the
Global Partnership for Artificial Intelligence (GPAI). The aims of this Process are “to foster an open and
enabling environment where safe, secure, and trustworthy AI systems are designed, developed, deployed,
and used to maximise the benefits of the technology while mitigating its risks, for the common good
worldwide, including in developing and emerging economies with a view to closing digital divides and
achieving digital inclusion.”
While an exhaustive discussion of how economic policymakers should respond to AI is beyond the scope
of this paper, some areas emerge as priorities from the overview presented here. To ensure the full
economic benefits of AI, it is essential to prioritize measures that guarantee market competition and
enhance widespread availability of AI technologies. An additional set of policies is crucial to secure
equitable and enduring benefits from AI. These policies should centre on addressing the impact of AI on
inequality, therefore emphasizing redistributive and educational aspects, as well as developing strategies
to adapt to the potentially unpredictable advancements in AI capabilities. Policies can also be distinguished
along their ex ante or ex post nature: the first regards policies to be adopted ex-ante for steering research
and development in AI and related technologies to maximise their benefits and limit their economic and
societal risks (Section 7.1); the second relates to policies aimed at addressing the effects of AI ex-post
(Section 7.2). (Comunale and Manera, 2024[185]) provide a recent overview of existing AI-related
regulations across a range of countries.
7.1. Steering the evolution of AI
The existential risks posed by the development of AGI (Bostrom, 2014[178]) have led some to argue for
slowing down its progress. (Jones, 2023[39]) states that self-regulation by a socially-minded entity is unlikely
to limit existential risks due to the presence of other for-profit firms, which raises the importance of
government policies and global cooperation (Gans, 2024[186]; Suleyman and Bhaskar, 2023[179]). Policies
to promote the accountability of AI systems include establishing auditing processes, ethics frameworks,
and other regulations (OECD, 2023[124]), as well as policies that make for-profit firms internalise
externalities such as product liability laws (Gans, 2024[186]).
More recently, (Sastry et al., 2024[7]) have suggested that an effective way to steer the development and
deployment of AI towards socially desirable outcomes is to focus governance efforts on the computing
power (“compute”) element of AI inputs (see Figure 1 in Section 2) due to its better detectability,
excludability and supply traceability relative to other inputs (software, data and skills). They argue that
governing computing power could facilitate regulatory visibility of AI, the allocation of AI resources to
beneficial uses, and the enforcement of restrictions against irresponsible or malicious AI development and
usage.
64 As pointed out by the OECD AI group of experts on AI Futures, the OECD is playing an important
role in providing key information and consensus guidelines for steering AI development and deployment –
64 (Sastry et al., 2024[7]) point out that domestic and international governance of AI computing power (“compute”) is
already happening in various forms (e.g., via direct investment, subsidisation and export controls). They suggest a
framework for steering such governance in ways that minimizes market distortions and maximizes social benefits.
 45
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
including by monitoring AI compute, reporting AI incidents and helping developing good practices and
standards (OECD, 2022[3]).
To limit the risks of increasing inequality, innovation and research could be steered toward more labouraugmenting as opposed to automating AI and related technologies, for example by shifting the relative tax
burdens on labour and capital or by increasing government funding for research and development in such
technologies (Acemoglu and Johnson, 2023[182]; Korinek, Schindler and Stiglitz, 2021[169]). Using these
tools, AI research could be steered toward technologies that create new occupational tasks, complement
worker skills and expertise, or that allow for better training or re-training of workers (Acemoglu, Autor and
Johnson, 2023[187]; Autor, 2024[69]). Given that appropriate skills reduce the risk of automation and are a
pre-requisite for technology adoption, governments should aim to ensure that the workforce is equipped
with sufficiently complementary skills to AI via updating and redesigning training and education (Artificial
Intelligence Commission of France, 2024[184]). These policies can also favour an effective labour
reallocation. Fostering dialogue among the social partners – representing workers and employers – is also
crucial to ensure the widespread acceptance of AI and guarding against potential AI misuse that could
infringe upon workers’ rights.
There is also the possibility to steer AI development in ways that encourage market competition and
promote innovation (Council of Economic Advisers, 2024[8]). For example, policies can support opensource ecosystems in order to allow firms of all sizes to develop AI technologies (Brynjolfsson and Unger,
2023[188]) and improve access to finance – potentially from public sources – for AI development (Artificial
Intelligence Commission of France, 2024[184]). Additionally, promoting access to training data and system
interoperability should be pursued, including via the harmonization of currently heterogeneous international
regulations. Currently, the OECD is collaborating with governments and different stakeholders involved in
the AI value chain to develop a set of guidelines to enhance interoperability and AI risk management
(OECD, 2023[189]). Governments should also consider the ex-ante regulation of certain types of algorithmic
pricing.65 More generally, competition laws and regulatory tools will need to be enforced to prevent
anticompetitive mergers and abuses of market power, which could limit AI development to a few selected
superstar firms. The innovative potential of AI could also be promoted by reforming intellectual property
rights laws to minimise the disincentives to innovation which involves training on IPR protected data.
66
Finally, AI tools can be used by competition authorities to detect and monitor anti-competitive practices.
Policies and regulations should also address other risks posed by AI such as bias, misinformation,
consumer manipulation, and issues around privacy. Policies can enhance the transparency of AI model
functioning by forcing AI developers to put extra efforts in understanding and stress-testing complex
models, eliminate bias from the datasets used to train them, discouraging ad targeting by taxing digital
ads, or prohibiting certain forms of price discrimination. Establishing internal auditing standards at the
industry level and imposing external auditing (including possibly by public agencies) before full
commercialization would seem to be also useful policy tools to consider.
7.2. Addressing the ex-post effects of AI
While the policies discussed above could be used to steer AI development toward more desirable
capabilities, another set of policies are also needed to address further undesirable effects such as rising
inequality and joblessness or increasing market concentration.
65 For instance, some have suggested restricting what actually goes on in the algorithms, such as prohibiting to
condition price changes on the past history of a firm prices or on competitors’ prices (Klein, 2021[115]).
66 An example would be to apply an ex post fair use principle to copyrighted material used to train large AI models
(Gans, 2024[186]), especially for new entrants.
46 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
AI, like most technologies, will create winners and losers. Workers may be impacted differently depending
on their skills, experience, occupation, industry, whether they have disabilities or whether AI can automate
or augment their tasks. Redistributive policies can help compensate workers that are more negatively
impacted by AI, but this may require changes in taxation policies to ensure more progressive taxation, and
a shift of taxation from labour towards other factors and rents generated by market power (Korinek,
Schindler and Stiglitz, 2021[169]). This may also be harder to achieve in developing countries, where fiscal
capacity is lower and where fewer benefits from AI may materialise. Social safety nets can also be reformed
to cushion the potential disruptive effects of AI on labour markets. Possible policies include reforming
unemployment insurance or increasing public funding for retraining policies.
More and better public spending on investments in education, training or physical and digital infrastructure
could also provide broader positive social returns and address some of the concerns relating to access to
AI and the potential to be complemented rather replaced by it (Artificial Intelligence Commission of France,
2024[184]). They can also provide additional demand for unskilled labour that may suffer from displacement
from AI (Korinek, Schindler and Stiglitz, 2021[169]).
More broadly, existing arrangements that discourage labour mobility, such as employee non-compete
agreements, could be prohibited, limited or more closely scrutinized by public authorities in order to
facilitate worker transitions to new jobs and locations and limit potential labour market bottlenecks (Bessen
et al., 2020[190]). For instance, such clauses have recently come under the review of competition authorities
in the US (FTC, 2023[191]), the UK (CMA, 2024[192]) and other OECD countries.67

7.3. Adapting policy and governance to the fast pace of AI innovation
Finally, and most crucially, the development of comprehensive policy frameworks is an urgent necessity,
as stressed by the OECD AI Principles. While policymakers and international organisations such as the
OECD are making concerted efforts to follow the swift and often unpredictable advancements in the
technology, both domestically and internationally, the current state of international policy coordination
suggests it is challenging to keep the pace in this critical race. The G7 Hiroshima Process on AI exemplifies
attempts at fostering deeper international cooperation. Such efforts are vital to ensure that AI technology
promotes significant aggregate productivity growth and welfare gains while adhering to the guiding
principles set forth by the OECD.
The unpredictable nature of AI development necessitates governance frameworks that can quickly adapt
to changing circumstances. Adopting a "portfolio approach" to planning – anticipating a spectrum of
scenarios from "business as usual" to the potential emergence of AGI – is crucial for developing adaptable
contingency plans (Korinek and Su, 2023[193]). This strategy represents a critical area where organizations
like the OECD can offer increased support and guidance. Given the rapid advancements in AI, the
importance of establishing agile policy mechanisms that can effectively respond to and capitalize on these
changes cannot be overstated. Without significant progress in this area, policy risks remaining significantly
outpaced by technology, missing crucial opportunities to shape the development and impact of AI on
society.
67 Proposals to address the possible negative effects of such clauses currently range from a complete ban to limiting
their duration, imposing mandatory worker compensations or increasing their transparency.
 47
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
References
Acemoglu, D. et al. (2022), “Artificial Intelligence and Jobs: Evidence from Online Vacancies”,
Journal of Labor Economic, Vol. 40/1.
[143]
Acemoglu, D., D. Autor and S. Johnson (2023), Can we Have Pro-Worker AI? Choosing a path
of machines in service of minds, MIT Shaping the Future of Work Initiative, Policy Memo..
[187]
Acemoglu, D. and S. Johnson (2023), Power and Progress: Our Thousand-Year Struggle Over
Technology and Prosperity, PublicAffairs/Hachette Book Group, New York, NY.
[102]
Acemoglu, D. and S. Johnson (2023), Rebalancing AI. IMF Finance & Development. [182]
Acemoglu, D. and T. Lensman (2023), “Regulating Transformative Technologies”, National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Papers No. 31461.
[38]
Acemoglu, D. and J. Loebbing (2022), “Automation and polarization”, National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Papers No. 30528., https://doi.org/10.3386/w30528.
[126]
Acemoglu, D., A. Malekian and A. Ozdaglar (2023b), “A model of behavioral manipulation”,
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Papers No. 31872.
[104]
Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2020), “Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor Markets”,
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 128/6.
[129]
Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2019), “Automation and New Tasks: How Technology Displaces
and Reinstates Labor”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 33/2, pp. 3-30.
[101]
Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2018), “The Race between Man and Machine: Implications of
Technology for Growth, Factor Shares, and Employment”, American Economic Review,
Vol. 108/6, pp. 1488–1542.
[141]
Acemoglul, D. (2024), The Simple Macreconomics of AI. forthcoming [72]
Aghion, P., B. Jones and C. Jones (2018), “Artificial Intelligence and Economic Growth”, NBER
Chapter in The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda, p. 237-28
[73]
Agrawal, A., J. Gans and A. Goldfarb (2023), Similarities and Differences in the Adoption of
General Purpose Technologies, NBER Chapters, in: Technology, Productivity, and Economic
Growth
[22]
Agrawal, A., J. Gans and A. Goldfarb (2023), "The Turing Transformation: Artificial intelligence,
intelligence augmentation, and skill premiums". National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Papers No. 31767.
[13]
48 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Agrawal, A., J. Gans and A. Goldfarb (2019), “Economic Policy for Artificial Intelligence”,
Innovation Policy and the Economy, Vol. 19.
[19]
Alderucci, D. et al. (2020), Quantifying the Impact of AI on Productivity and Labor Demand:
Evidence from U.S. Census Microdata,
https://www.aeaweb.org/conference/2020/preliminary/paper/Tz2HdRna.
[47]
Alekseeva, L. et al. (2020), “The Demand for AI Skills in the Labour Market”, CEPR Discussion
Paper, Vol. DP14320.
[134]
Alonso, C. et al. (2020), “Will the AI revolution cause a great divergence?”, IMF Working Paper,
Vol. 20/104.
[170]
Andre, C. and P. Gal (2024), “Reviving productivity growth: A review of policies”, OECD
Economics Department Policy Paper, forthcoming.
[36]
Andre, C., P. Gal and M. Schief (2024), “Enhancing Productivity and Growth in an Ageing
Society: Key Mechanisms and Policy Options”, OECD Economics Department Working
Paper, forthcoming.
[92]
Anyoha, R. (2017), The History of Artificial Intelligence. Science in the News,
https://sitn.hms.harvard.edu/flash/2017/history-artificial-intelligence/.
[82]
Artificial Intelligence Commission of France (2024), IA : Notre Ambition pour la France,
https://www.gouvernement.fr/actualite/25-recommandations-pour-lia-en-france.
[184]
Assad, S. et al. (2020), Algorithmic pricing and competition: Empirical evidence from the German
retail gasoline market. CESifo Working Paper No. 8521.
[118]
Autor, D. (2024), “Applying AI to Rebuild Middle Class Jobs”, National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Papers No. 32140
[69]
Autor, D. et al. (2022), “New Frontiers: The Origins and Content of New Work, 1940–2018”,
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Papers No. 30389.
[142]
Autor, D., C. Goldin and L. Katz (2020), “Extending the Race between Education and
Technology”, AEA Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 110, pp. 347–51.
[150]
Autor, D., F. Levy and R. Murnane (2003), “The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change:
An Empirical Exploration”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118/4, pp. 1279–1333.
[128]
Babina, T. et al. (2024), “Artificial intelligence, firm growth, and product innovation”, Journal of
Financial Economics, Vol. 151/103745.
[30]
Baily, M., E. Brynjolfsson and A. Korinek (2023), Machines of mind: The case for an AI-powered
productivity boom. Brookings, https://www.brookings.edu/articles/machines-of-mind-the-casefor-an-ai-powered-productivity-boo
[37]
Baker, R. (2021), “Artificial intelligence in education: Bringing it all together”, in OECD Digital
Education Outlook 2021: Pushing the Frontiers with Artificial Intelligence, Blockchain and
Robots, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/f54ea644-en.
[148]
Baldwin, R. (2020), The Globotics Upheaval, Oxford University Press. [173]
 49
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Baldwin, R. and J. Dingel (2021), “Telemigration and Development: on the Offshorability of
Teleworkable Jobs”, National Bureau of Economics Research Working Papers No. 29387.
[174]
BarclayHedge (2018), BarclayHedge Survey: Majority of Hedge Fund Pros Use AI/Machine
Learning in Investment Strategies, https://www.barclayhedge.com/insider/barclayhedgesurvey-majority-of-hedge-fund-pros-use-ai-machine-learning-in-investment-strategies.
[62]
Barro, R. (1999), “Notes on Growth Accounting”, Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 4, pp. 119–
137.
[201]
Baruffaldi, S. et al. (2020), “Identifying and measuring developments in artificial intelligence:
Making the impossible possible”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers,
No. 2020/05, https://doi.org/10.1787/5f65ff7e-en.
[83]
Basu, S. et al. (eds.) (2023), Data, Intangible Capital, and Productivity, University of Chicago
Press.
[70]
Bazarbash, M. (2019), “FinTech in Financial Inclusion: Machine Learning Applications in
Assessing Credit Risk”, IMF Working Paper, Vol. WP/2019/109.
[154]
Berryhill, J. et al. (2019), Hello, World: Artificial intelligence and its use in the public sector,
http://oe.cd/helloworld.
[64]
Bessen, J. (2018), “AI and Jobs: The Role of Demand”, National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Papers No. 24235.
[140]
Bessen, J. et al. (2020), Automation: A guide for policymakers. Brookings Economic Studies,
January 2020.
[190]
Bianchini, S., M. Müller and P. Pelletier (2022), “Artificial intelligence in science: An emerging
general method of invention”, Research Policy, Vol. 51/10.
[27]
Björkegren, D. and J. Blumenstock (2023), “Technology for Development”, IMF Finance &
Development.
[171]
Blattner, L. and S. Nelson (2021), “How Costly is Noise? Data and Disparities in Consumer
Credit”, arXiv:2105.07554.
[157]
Bloom, N. et al. (2020), “Are ideas getting harder to find?”, American Economic Review,
Vol. 110/4, pp. 1104-1144.
[26]
Bontadini, F. et al. (2024), Digitalization of financial services, access to finance, and aggregate
economic performance. OECD Economics Department Working Papers, forthcoming.
[153]
Borgonovi, F. et al. (2023), "Emerging trends in AI skill demand across 14 OECD countries",
OECD Artificial Intelligence Papers, No. 2, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/7c691b9a-en.
[94]
Bostrom, N. (2014), Superintelligence: Paths, dangers, strategies. Oxford University Press [178]
Boukherouaa, E. et al. (2021), “Powering the Digital Economy: Opportunities and Risks of
Artificial Intelligence in Finance”, IMF Departmental Paper No 2021/024.
[155]
Bresnahan, T. and M. Trajtenberg (1995), “General purpose technologies ‘Engines of growth’?”,
Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 65, pp. 83-108.
[17]
50 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Brown, S. (2019), The lure of “so-so technology,” and how to avoid it,
https://mitsloan.mit.edu/ideas-made-to-matter/lure-so-so-technology-and-how-to-avoid-it.
[203]
Brown, Z. and A. MacKay (2023), “Competition in pricing algorithms”, American Economic
Journal: Microeconomics, Vol. 15/2, pp. 109-156.
[204]
Brundage, M. et al. (2020), Toward trustworthy AI development: mechanisms for supporting
verifiable claims, arXiv:2004.07213.
[120]
Brynjolfsson, E. (2022), “The Turing Trap: The Promise & Peril of Human-Like Artificial
Intelligence”, Dædalus (2022) 151 (2): 272–287.
[196]
Brynjolfsson, E., D. Li and L. Raymond (2023), "Generative AI at Work", National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Papers No. 31161.
[6]
Brynjolfsson, E. and L. M. Hitt (2003), “Computing Productivity: Firm-Level Evidence”, The
Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 85/4, pp. 793–808,.
[43]
Brynjolfsson, E. and A. McAfee (2014), The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and
Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies, W. W. Norton & Company.
[132]
Brynjolfsson, E., D. Rock and C. Syverson (2021), “The Productivity J-Curve: How Intangibles
Complement General Purpose Technologies”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
Vol. 13/1, pp. 333-372,
[68]
Brynjolfsson, E. and G. Unger (2023), The Macroeconomics of AI, IMF Finance & Development. [188]
Buolamwini, J. (2023), Unmasking AI: My Mission to Protect What Is Human In a World of
Machines, Penguin Random House.
[161]
Buolamwini, J. and I. Raji (2019), Actionable Auditing: Investigating the Impact of Publicly
Naming Biased Performance Results of Commercial AI Products. MIT Media Lab.
[163]
Caira, C. et al. (2023), “Artificially Inequitable? AI and closing the gender gap”, The AI Wonk,
https://oecd.ai/en/wonk/closing-the-gender-gap.
[158]
Calo, R. (2013), “Digital market manipulation”, Geo. Wash. L. Rev., Vol. 82/995. [103]
Calvano, E. et al. (2020), “Artificial intelligence, algorithmic pricing, and collusion”, American
Economic Review, Vol. 110/10, pp. 3267-3297.
[110]
Calvano, E. et al. (2023), Artificial Intelligence, Algorithmic Recommendations and Competition.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4448010.
[100]
Calvino, F. et al. (2023), What technologies are at the core of AI? An exploration based on
patent data, OECD Artificial Intelligence Papers, No. 6, OECD Publishing, Paris.
https://doi.org/10.1787/32406765-en.
[34]
Calvino, F. and L. Fontanelli (2023), “A portrait of AI adopters across countries: Firm
characteristics, assets’ complementarities and productivity”, OECD Science, Technology and
Industry Working Papers, No. 2023/02, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/0fb79bb9-en.
[45]
Calvino, F. and L. Fontanelli (2023), Artificial intelligence, complementary assets and
productivity: evidence from French firms. LEM Working Paper Series 2023/35.
[46]
 51
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Cazzaniga, M. et al. (2024), “Gen-AI: Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Work”, IMF Staff
Discussion Notes No. 2024/001
[80]
Chen, Z. (2023), “Ethics and discrimination in artificial intelligence-enabled recruitment
practices”, Humanities and Social Sciences Communications, Vol. 10.
[167]
Chetty, R., J. Friedman and J. Rocko (2014), “Measuring the Impact of Teachers II: The LongTerm Impacts of Teachers.”, American Economic Review, Vol. 104/9, pp. 2633-2679.
[149]
CMA (2024), “Competition and market power in UK labour markets”, Competition and Markets
Authority.
[192]
CMA (2023), “IA Foundation Models Initial Report.”, Competition and Markets Authority (CMA),.
[9]
Cockburn, I., R. Henderson and S. Stern (2018), The impact of artificial intelligence on
innovation: An exploratory analysis., University of Chicago Press.
[20]
Comunale, M. and A. Manera (2024), “The Economic Impacts and the Regulation of AI: A
Review of the Academic Literature and Policy Actions”, IMF Working Papers, Vol. 2024/065,
p. 1, https://doi.org/10.5089/9798400268588.001.
[185]
Cook, L. (2023), Generative AI, Productivity, the Labor Market, and Choice Behavior,
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/cook20230922a.htm.
[208]
Cornelli, G., J. Frost and S. Mishra (2023), “Artificial intelligence, services globalisation and
income inequality”, BIS Working Papers, Vol. 1135.
[138]
Corrado, C. et al. (2021), New evidence on intangibles, diffusion and productivity. OECD
Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers, No. 2021/10, OECD Publishing, Paris.
[87]
Corrado, C., J. Haskel and C. Jona-Lasinio (2021), “Artificial intelligence and productivity: an
intangible assets approach”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, pp. 435-458.
[11]
Costa, H. et al. (2021), “Welcome to the (digital) jungle: Measuring online platform diffusion”,
OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 1683, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/b4e771d7-en.
[97]
Council of Economic Advisers (2024), Economic Report of the President,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/ERP-2024.pdf.
[8]
Coyle, D. (2023), “The Promise and Peril of Generative AI”, Project Syndicate,
https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/generative-ai-tools-could-displace-millions-ofworkers-but-also-boost-productivity-growth-by-diane-coyle-2023-04.
[183]
Criscuolo, C. et al. (2020), “Workforce composition, productivity and pay: The role of firms in
wage inequality”, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, Vol. 241.
https://doi.org/10.1787/52ab4e26-en.
[137]
Czarnitzki, D., G. Fernández and C. Rammer (2023), “Artificial intelligence and firm-level
productivity”, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, Vol. 211, pp. 188-205.
[49]
Damioli, G., V. Van Roy and D. Vertesy (2021), “The impact of artificial intelligence on labor
productivity”, Eurasian Business Review, Vol. 11, pp. 1-25.
[48]
52 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Delis, M., F. Fringuellotti and S. Ongena (2023), “Credit and Income Inequality”, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York Staff Reports.
[151]
Dell’Acqua, F. et al. (2023), Navigating the Jagged Technological Frontier: Field Experimental
Evidence of the Effects of AI on Knowledge Worker Productivity and Quality. Harvard
Business School Technology & Operations Mgt. Unit Working Paper No. 24-013.
[53]
Dougherty, S. (2024), “Deploying artificial intelligence and data analytics to support
intergovernmental fiscal relations”, Policy Brief, OECD Network on Fiscal Relations across
Levels of Government, https://www.oecd.org/tax/federalism/deploying-artificial-intelligenceand-data-analytics.pdf.
[176]
Durlauf, P. (ed.) (2005), General Purpose Technologies, Amsterdam: Elsevier. [198]
Eisfeldt, A., G. Schubert and M. Zhang (2023), "Generative AI and Firm Values", National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Papers No. 31222
[66]
Eloundou, T. et al. (2023), “GPTs are GPTs: An Early Look at the Labor Market Impact Potential
of Large Language Models”, https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.10130.
[130]
Felten, E., M. Raj and R. Seamans (2023), Occupational Heterogeneity in Exposure to
Generative AI, https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4414065.
[202]
Felten, E., M. Raj and R. Seamans (2021), “Occupational, industry, and geographic exposure to
artificial intelligence: A novel dataset and its potential uses”, Strategic Management Journal,
Vol. 42/12, pp. 2195-2217
[40]
Felten, E., M. Raj and R. Seamans (2019), “The Variable Impact of Artificial Intelligence on
Labor: The Role of Complementary Skills and Technologies”, SSRN Electronic Journal,
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3368605.
[135]
Fossen, F. and A. Sorgner (2022), “New digital technologies and heterogeneous wage and
employment dynamics in the United States: Evidence from individual-level data”,
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, Vol. 175, p. 121381,
[136]
FTC (2023), “FTC proposes rule to ban non-compete clauses which hurt workers and harm
competition”, Federal Trade Commission (FTC).
[191]
Furman, J. (2016), Is This Time Different? The Opportunities and Challenges, https://
obamawhitehouse .archives .gov /sites.
[41]
Furman, J. and R. Seamans (2019), “AI and the Economy”, Innovation Policy and the Economy,
Vol. 19, pp. 161-191
[5]
G7 (2023), Hiroshima Principles.
[119]
Gal, P. et al. (2019), “Digitalization and Productivity: In Search of the Holy Grail - Firm-level
Empirical Evidence from European Countries”, International Productivity Monitor, Vol. 37,
pp. 39-71.
[44]
Gans, J. (2024), “Copyright Policy Options for Generative Artificial Intelligence.”, National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Papers No. 32106.
[186]
Gates, S., V. Perry and P. Zorn (2002), “Automated underwriting in mortgage lending: Good
news for the underserved?”, Housing Policy Debate, Vol. 13.
[152]
 53
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Gensler, G. (2023), “Remarks before the Financial Stability Oversight Council: 2023 Annual
Report”, https://www.sec.gov/news/speech/gensler-remarks-fsoc-121423.
[156]
Georgieff, A. (2024), “Artificial Intelligence and Wage Inequality”, OECD Artificial Intelligence
Papers No. 15 https://doi.org/10.1787/bf98a45c-en.
[133]
Georgieff, A. and R. Hyee (2021), “Artificial intelligence and employment: New cross-country
evidence”, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, Vol. 265, p. 60,
https://doi.org/10.1787/c2c1d276-en.
[81]
Gibson, M. (2021), “Employer market power in Silicon Valley”, IZA Discussion Paper No. 14843.
[95]
Global X (2021), Putting chip shortage in context., https://www.globalxetfs.com/putting-the-chipshortage-into-the-context-of-long-term-trends/.
[90]
Goldfarb, A., B. Taska and F. Teodoridis (2023), “Could machine learning be a general purpose
technology? a comparison of emerging technologies using data from online job postings”,
Research Policy, Vol. 52/1.
[199]
Goldin, I. et al. (2024), “Why is productivity slowing down?”, Journal of Economic Literature,
Vol. 62/1, pp. 196-268,
[35]
Goldman Sachs (2023), Upgrading Our Longer-Run Global Growth Forecasts to Reflect the
Impact of Generative AI, https://www.goldmansachs.com/intelligence/pages/generative-aicould-raise-global-gdp-by-7-percent.html.
[71]
Green, A. and L. Lamby (2023), “The supply, demand and characteristics of the AI workforce
across OECD countries”, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers No. 287,
https://doi.org/10.1787/bb17314a-en.
[96]
Griffith, E. (2023), The Desperate Hunt for the AI Boom’s Most Indispensable Prize, International
New York Times, 18 Aug. 2023.
[89]
Guerreiro, J., S. Rebelo and P. Teles (2023), “Regulating Artificial Intelligence”, National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper 31921.
[108]
Hacibedel, B. et al. (2020), “Inequality in Good and Bad Times: A Cross-Country Approach”, IMF
Working Paper, Vol. WP/19/20.
[139]
Haramboure, A. et al. (2023), "Vulnerabilities in the semiconductor supply chain", OECD
Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers, No. 2023/05, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/6bed616f-en.
[91]
Haslberger, M., J. Gingrich and J. Bhatia (2023), No great equalizer: experimental evidence on
AI in the UK labor market, https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4594466.
[54]
Hua, S. and H. Belfield (2020), “AI & Antitrust: Reconciling Tensions between Competition Law
and Cooperative AI Development”, Yale JL & Tech..
[123]
Hunkenschroer, L. and C. Luetge (2022), “Ethics of AI-enabled recruiting and selection: A review
and research agenda.”, Journal of Business Ethics. 178, 977–1007 (2022).
[206]
Ing, L. and G. Grossman (2022), Robots and AI: A New Economic Era, Routledge, [21]
54 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Jackson, M. (2021), “Artificial Intelligence & Algorithmic Bias: The Issues With Technology
Reflecting History & Humans”, Journal of Business Technology & Law, Vol. 16/2.
[166]
Jones, C. (2023), “The A.I. Dilemma: Growth versus Existential Risk”, National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Papers No. 31837,.
[39]
Jones, C. (2023), “The Outlook For Long-Term Economic Growth”, National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Papers No. 31648.
[24]
Jumper, J. et al. (2021), “Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold”, Nature,
Vol. 596/7873, pp. 583-589,.
[31]
Kanazawa, K. et al. (2022), AI, Skill, and Productivity: The Case of Taxi Drivers, National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Papers No. 30612.
[65]
Kaplan, J. et al. (2020), Scaling laws for neural language models, arXiv:2001.08361.
[99]
Karabarbounis, L. (2023), “Perspectives on the labor share”, National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Papers No. 31854.
[125]
Klein, T. (2021), “Autonomous algorithmic collusion: Q‑learning under sequential pricing”,
Amsterdam Law School Research Paper No. 2018-15.
[115]
Korinek, A. (2023), Scenario Planning for an A(G)I Future, IMF Finance & Development,
December 2023.
[16]
Korinek, A., M. Schindler and J. Stiglitz (2021), “Technological Progress, Artificial Intelligence,
and Inclusive Growth”, IMF Working Paper, Vol. WP/21/166.
[169]
Korinek, A. and J. Stiglitz (2021), “Steering technological progress” , http://rcea.org/wpcontent/uploads/2021/04/Future-of-growth/Korinek.pdf
[180]
Korinek, A. and D. Su (2023), "Scenarios for the Transition to AGI", National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Papers No.32255
[193]
Kotlikoff, L. (2022), “Does Prediction Machines Predict Our AI Future? A Review”, Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol. 60/3, pp. 1052-57, https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.20191519.
[200]
Kurzweil, R. (2005), The Singularity is Near: When HUmans Transcend Biology, Penguin Group. [197]
Lai, V. et al. (2023), “ChatGPT Beyond English: Towards a Comprehensive Evaluation of Large
Language Models in Multilingual Learning”, arXiv:2304.05613.
[172]
Lane, M. (2024), “Who will be the workers most affected by AI? A closer look at the impact of AI
on women, low-skilled and other vulnerable groups”, OECD Artificial Intelligence Papers,
forthcoming.
[131]
Lane, M., M. Williams and S. Broecke (2023), “The impact of AI on the workplace: Main findings
from the OECD AI surveys of employers and workers”, OECD Social, Employment and
Migration Working Papers 288, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1787/ea0a0fe1-en.
[56]
Lassébie, J. and G. Quintini (2022), “What skills and abilities can automation technologies
replicate and what does it mean for workers?: New evidence”, OECD Social, Employment
and Migration Working Papers, Vol. 282, p. 66, https://doi.org/10.1787/646aad77-en.
[77]
 55
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Lipsey, R., K. Carlaw and C. Bekar (2005), Economic Transformations: General Purpose
Technologies and Economic Growth, Oxford University Press, Oxford UK.
[2]
Li, Q., N. Philipsen and C. Cauffman (2023), “AI-enabled price discrimination as an abuse of
dominance: a law and economics analysis”, China-EU Law Journal.
[106]
Lorenz, P., K. Perset and J. Berryhill (2023), “Initial policy considerations for generative artificial
intelligence”, OECD Artificial Intelligence Papers, No. 1, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/fae2d1e6-en.
[15]
Luccioni, A. et al. (2023), “Stable Bias: Analyzing Societal Representations in Diffusion Models”,
arXiv:2303.11408.
[164]
Ludwig, J. and S. Mullainathan (2024), “Machine Learning as a Tool for Hypothesis Generation”,
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 139/2, pp. 751-827,
[29]
McElheran, K. et al. (2023), AI Adoption in America: Who, What, and Where, National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Papers No. 31788.
[84]
McKinsey (2023), The economic potential of generative AI. McKinsey Report January 2023. [60]
Merchant, A. et al. (2023), “Scaling deep learning for materials discovery”, Nature,
Vol. 624/7990, pp. 80-85
[58]
Microsoft Research, A. (2023), The Impact of Large Language Models on Scientific Discovery: a
Preliminary Study using GPT-4, arXiv:2311.07361.
[32]
Milanez, A. (2023), “The impact of AI on the workplace: Evidence from OECD case studies of AI
implementation”, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, Vol. 289, p. 114,
https://doi.org/10.1787/2247ce58-en.
[55]
Milmo, D. (2023), ChatGPT reaches 100 million users two months after launch,
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2023/feb/02/chatgpt-100-million-users-open-aifastest-growing-app.
[85]
Mohammad, W., A. Elomri and L. Kerbache (2022), “The Global Semiconductor Chip Shortage:
Causes, Implications, and Potential Remedies”, IFAC-PapersOnLine, Vol. 55/10, pp. 476-
483.
[88]
Mokyr, J. (2018), Building Taller Ladders, IMF Finance & Development, June 2018. [25]
Mujtaba, D. and N. Mahapatra (2019), Ethical considerations in AI-based recruitment, 2019 IEEE
International Symposium on Technology and Society (ISTAS), Medford, MA, USA, 2019, pp.
1-7,
[205]
Muro, M. and S. Liu (2021), “The geography of AI: which cities will drive the artificial evolution?”,
Brookings Metropolitan Policy Program.
[146]
Musolff, L. (2022), Algorithmic pricing facilitates tacit collusion: Evidence from e-commerce.
Proceedings of the 23rd ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, July 2022, Pages
32–33.
[117]
56 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Nicoletti, G., C. Vitale and C. Abate (2023), “Competition, regulation and growth in a digitized
world: Dealing with emerging competition issues in digital markets”, OECD Economics
Department Working Papers, No. 1752, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/1b143a37-en.
[98]
Nicoletti, L. and D. Bass (2023), Humans are biased, Generative AI is even worse,
https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2023-generative-ai-bias/.
[165]
Nordhaus, W. (2021), “Are We Approaching an Economic Singularity? Information Technology
and the Future of Economic Growth”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
Vol. 13/1, pp. 299–332
[177]
Novelli, C., M. Taddeo and L. Floridi (2023), “Accountability in artificial intelligence: what it is and
how it works”, AI & SOCIETY, pp. 1-12.
[109]
Noy, S. and W. Zhang (2023), Experimental Evidence on the Productivity Effects of Generative
Artificial Intelligence. Science 381,187-92(2023).
[52]
OECD (2023), Artificial Intelligence in Science: Challenges, Opportunities and the Future of
Research, https://doi.org/10.1787/a8d820bd-en.
[33]
OECD (2023), “A blueprint for building national compute capacity for artificial intelligence”,
OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 350, https://doi.org/10.1787/876367e3-en.
[10]
OECD (2023), “Advancing accountability in AI: Governing and managing risks throughout the
lifecycle for trustworthy AI”, OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 349, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/2448f04b-en.
[124]
OECD (2023), “AI language models: Technological, socio-economic and policy considerations”,
OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 352, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/13d38f92-en.
[79]
OECD (2023), Algorithmic Competition, OECD Competition Policy Roundtable Background Note,
https://www.oecd.org/daf/competition/algorithmic-competition-2023.pdf.
[112]
OECD (2023), “Common guideposts to promote interoperability in AI risk management”, OECD
Artificial Intelligence Papers, No. 5, https://doi.org/10.1787/ba602d18-en.
[189]
OECD (2023), Employment Outlook, https://doi.org/10.1787/08785bba-en.
[93]
OECD (2023), “Generative artificial intelligence in finance”, OECD Artificial Intelligence Papers,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/ac7149cc-en.
[63]
OECD (2023), OECD Employment Outlook 2023: Artificial Intelligence and the Labour Market,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/08785bba-en.
[57]
OECD (2023), Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence,
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0449.
[4]
OECD (2023), The human behind the machine: Skills and attitudes towards the future of artificial
intelligence, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/fc36a980-en.
[175]
OECD (2022), “Disability, Work and Inclusion: Mainstreaming in All Policies and Practices”,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/1eaa5e9c-en.
[159]
 57
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
OECD (2022), “OECD Framework for the Classification of AI systems”, OECD Digital Economy
Papers, No. 323, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/cb6d9eca-en.
[12]
OECD (2022), Summary of OECD expert discussion on future risks from artificial intelligence of
20 October 2022.
[3]
OECD (2021), AI in Business and Finance, OECD Business and Finance Outlook 2021. [61]
OECD (2021), Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Big Data in Finance: Opportunities,
Challenges and Implications for Policy Makers, https://www.oecd.org/finance/financialmarkets/Artificial-intelligence-machine-learning-big-data-in-finance.pdf.
[168]
OECD (2021), Competition issues in AI, https://read.oecd-ilibrary.org/finance-andinvestment/oecd-business-and-finance-outlook-2021_ba.
[111]
OECD (2020), The Digitalisation of Science, Technology and Innovation: Key Developments and
Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/b9e4a2c0-en.
[59]
OECD (2019), Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence,
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0449.
[1]
OECD (2019), Scoping the OECD AI principles: Deliberations of the Expert Group on Artificial,
https://doi.org/10.1787/d62f618a-en.
[194]
OECD (2019), “Under Pressure: The Squeezed Middle Class”, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/689afed1-en
[127]
OECD (2018), Personalised Pricing in the Digital Era. OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://www.oecd.org/competition/personalised-pricing-in-the-digital-era.htm
[105]
OECD (2017), Algorithms and Collusion: Competition Policy in the Digital Age. OECD
Publishing, Paris.
[107]
O’Keefe, C. et al. (2020), The windfall clause: Distributing the benefits of AI for the common
good, arXiv:1912.11595.
[122]
OpenAI (2018), , https://openai.com/charter.
[121]
Peng, S. et al. (2023), The Impact of AI on Developer Productivity: Evidence from GitHub
Copilot. arXiv:2302.06590
[51]
Perez-Cruz, F. and H. Shin (2024), “Testing the cognitive limits of large language models”, BIS
Bulletin 83,
[78]
Piketty, T. (2014), Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Harvard University Press. [145]
Ramos, G., M. Squicciarini and E. Lamm (2024), “Making AI Ethical by Design: The UNESCO
Perspective”, Computer, Vol. 57/2, pp. 33-43
[162]
Sanchez-Cartas, J. and E. Katsamakas (2022), Artificial Intelligence, algorithmic competition and
market structures. IEEE Access PP(99):1-1.
[116]
Sastry, G. et al. (2024), “Computing Power and the Governance of Artificial Intelligence”,
arXiv:2402.08797
[7]
58 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Schwalbe, U. (2018), “Algorithms, machine learning, and collusion”, Journal of Competition Law
& Economics. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3232631.
[114]
Sorbe, S., P. Gal and V. Millot (2018), “Can productivity still grow in service-based economies?
Literature overview and preliminary evidence from OECD countries”, OECD Economics
Department Working Papers No 1531.
[74]
Suleyman, M. and M. Bhaskar (2023), The Coming Wave: Technology, Power, and the Twentyfirst Century’s Greatest Dilemma, Crown.
[179]
Susskind, D. (2020), “A Model of Task Encroachment in the Labour Market”, Oxford University
Working Paper, https://www. danielsusskind. com/s/SUSSKIND-Task-Encroachment-April2020. pdf.
[75]
Svanberg, M. et al. (2024), Beyond AI Exposure: Which Tasks are Cost-Effective to Automate
with Computer Vision? http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4700751.
[207]
The Economist (2023), ChatGPT mania may be cooling, but a serious new industry is taking
shape, https://www.economist.com/leaders/2023/09/21/chatgpt-mania-may-be-cooling-but-aserious-new-industry-is-taking-shape.
[86]
Touzet, C. (2023), “Using AI to support people with disability in the labour market: Opportunities
and challenges”, OECD Artificial Intelligence Papers No.7, OECD Publishing, Paris,,
https://doi.org/10.1787/008b32b7-en.
[160]
Trammell, P. and A. Korinek (2023), “Economic Growth under Transformative AI”, National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Papers No. 31815.
[144]
Van Noorden, R. and J. Perkel (2023), “AI and science: what 1,600 researchers think.”, Nature,
Vol. 621/7980, pp. 672-675.
[28]
Varian, H. (2019), Artificial Intelligence, Economics, and Industrial Organization, NBER Chapter
in The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda, pp 399 – 422.
[18]
Vollrath, D. (2020), Fully grown: Why a stagnant economy is a sign of success, University of
Chicago Press.
[67]
WEF (2023), Jobs of Tomorrow: Large Language Models and Jobs. WEF White Papers,
September 2023.
[76]
Wei, J. and et al (2022), “Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models”, Transactions on
Machine Learning Research, arXiv:2206.07682.
[23]
Xingchen, X., S. Lee and Y. Tan (2023), Algorithmic Collusion or Competition: the Role of
Platforms’ Recommender Systems, arXiv:2309.14548.
[113]
Zucman, G. et al. (2022), “Globalisation and the effective taxation of capital versus labour”,
VoxEU Column, Taxation, 2022.
[147]
 59
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Annex A. Additional Tables and Figures
Table A.1. OECD AI Principles
Values based principles Recommendations for policy makers
1.1 Inclusive growth, sustainable development and well-being
Stakeholders should proactively engage in responsible stewardship of
trustworthy AI in pursuit of beneficial outcomes for people and the planet,
such as augmenting human capabilities and enhancing creativity, advancing
inclusion of underrepresented populations, reducing economic, social,
gender and other inequalities, and protecting natural environments, thus
invigorating inclusive growth, sustainable development and well-being.
2.1.Investing in AI research and development
a) Governments should consider long-term public investment, and
encourage private investment, in research and development,
including interdisciplinary efforts, to spur innovation in trustworthy AI
that focus on challenging technical issues and on AI-related social,
legal and ethical implications and policy issues.
b) Governments should also consider public investment and
encourage private investment in open datasets that are
representative and respect privacy and data protection to support an
environment for AI research and development that is free of
inappropriate bias and to improve interoperability and use of
standards
1.2 Human-centred values and fairness
a) AI actors should respect the rule of law, human rights and democratic
values, throughout the AI system lifecycle. These include freedom, dignity
and autonomy, privacy and data protection, non-discrimination and equality,
diversity, fairness, social justice, and internationally recognised labour rights.
b) To this end, AI actors should implement mechanisms and safeguards,
such as capacity for human determination, that are appropriate to the
context and consistent with the state of art.
2.2.Fostering a digital ecosystem for AI
Governments should foster the development of, and access to, a
digital ecosystem for trustworthy AI. Such an ecosystem includes in
particular digital technologies and infrastructure, and mechanisms for
sharing AI knowledge, as appropriate. In this regard, governments
should consider promoting mechanisms, such as data trusts, to
support the safe, fair, legal and ethical sharing of data.
1.3 Transparency and explainability
AI Actors should commit to transparency and responsible disclosure
regarding AI systems. To this end, they should provide meaningful
information, appropriate to the context, and consistent with the state of art:
i.to foster a general understanding of AI systems,
ii.to make stakeholders aware of their interactions with AI systems,
including in the workplace,
iii.to enable those affected by an AI system to understand the outcome,
and,
iv.to enable those adversely affected by an AI system to challenge its
outcome based on plain and easy-to-understand information on the
factors, and the logic that served as the basis for the prediction,
recommendation or decision.
2.3.Shaping an enabling policy environment for AI
a) Governments should promote a policy environment that supports
an agile transition from the research and development stage to the
deployment and operation stage for trustworthy AI systems. To this
effect, they should consider using experimentation to provide a
controlled environment in which AI systems can be tested, and
scaled-up, as appropriate.
b) Governments should review and adapt, as appropriate, their policy
and regulatory frameworks and assessment mechanisms as they
apply to AI systems to encourage innovation and competition for
trustworthy AI.
1.4 Robustness, security and safety
a) AI systems should be robust, secure and safe throughout their entire
lifecycle so that, in conditions of normal use, foreseeable use or misuse, or
other adverse conditions, they function appropriately and do not pose
unreasonable safety risk.
b) To this end, AI actors should ensure traceability, including in relation to
datasets, processes and decisions made during the AI system lifecycle, to
enable analysis of the AI system’s outcomes and responses to inquiry,
appropriate to the context and consistent with the state of art.
c)AI actors should, based on their roles, the context, and their ability to act,
apply a systematic risk management approach to each phase of the AI
system lifecycle on a continuous basis to address risks related to AI
systems, including privacy, digital security, safety and bias.
2.4.Building human capacity and preparing for labour market
transformation
a) Governments should work closely with stakeholders to prepare for
the transformation of the world of work and of society. They should
empower people to effectively use and interact with AI systems
across the breadth of applications, including by equipping them with
the necessary skills.
b) Governments should take steps, including through social dialogue,
to ensure a fair transition for workers as AI is deployed, such as
through training programmes along the working life, support for those
affected by displacement, and access to new opportunities in the
labour market.
c) Governments should also work closely with stakeholders to
promote the responsible use of AI at work, to enhance the safety of
workers and the quality of jobs, to foster entrepreneurship and
productivity, and aim to ensure that the benefits from AI are broadly
and fairly shared.
60 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
1.5 Accountability
AI actors should be accountable for the proper functioning of AI systems and
for the respect of the above principles, based on their roles, the context, and
consistent with the state of art.
2.5 .International co-operation for trustworthy AI
a) Governments, including developing countries and with
stakeholders, should actively co-operate to advance these principles
and to progress on responsible stewardship of trustworthy AI.
b) Governments should work together in the OECD and other global
and regional fora to foster the sharing of AI knowledge, as
appropriate. They should encourage international, cross-sectoral and
open multi-stakeholder initiatives to garner long-term expertise on AI.
c) Governments should promote the development of multistakeholder, consensus-driven global technical standards for
interoperable and trustworthy AI.
d) Governments should also encourage the development, and their
own use, of internationally comparable metrics to measure AI
research, development and deployment, and gather the evidence
base to assess progress in the implementation of these principles.
Source: OECD.AI, AI Principles overview. For more details, see (OECD, 2019[1])
 61
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Table A.2. Estimates on the effect of AI on firm productivity and worker performance
Paper Treatment Outcome Sample Method Effect SE
Calvino and
Fontanelli
(2023a)
AI use Turnover/employment 9 OECD
countries
OLS without
firm FE
0.087 0.027
Alderucci et al.
(2019)
AI patents Log revenues per worker US, 2000-2018 Event study 0.068 0.004
Damioli et al.
(2021)
AI patents Log revenues per worker Orbis, 2000-
2016
GMM
estimation of
prd.
Function -
one step
0.032 0.011
Czarnitzki et al.
(2023)
AI use Log sales Germany, 2018 IV with FE
and entropy
balancing
0.044 0.020
Calvino and
Fontanelli
(2023b)
AI use Log VA per worker French firms,
2019
OLS with
control for
initial
productivity
and ICT
0.027 0.028
Calvino and
Fontanelli
(2023a)
AI use Turnover/employment 9 OECD
countries
OLS without
firm FE but
including
other digital
tech.
0.021 0.052
Calvino and
Fontanelli
(2023b)
AI
developer
Log VA per worker French firms,
2020
OLS with
control for
initial
productivity
and ICT
0.106 0.053
Brynjolfsson et
al. (2023)
AI-based
assistant
Log resolution per hours Call centers
employees,
2020-2021
Event study 0.138 0.020
Peng et al.
(2023)
GitHub
Copilot
% number of tasks
completed
Software
developers,
2022
Experiment 0.558 0.169
Noy and Zhang
(2023)
ChatGPT Average effect Professional
writing, 2022
Online
experiment
0.479 0.053
Dell'Acqua et
al. (2023)
ChatGPT4
Performance (quality,
inside frontier, GPT only)
Consultants,
2023
Experiment 0.388 0.019
Haslberger et
al. (2023)
ChatGPT Average overall effect UK working-age
population, 2023
Experiment 0.481 0.022
Notes: SEs for Peng et al. (2023) are calculated indirectly using the 95% confidence interval reported in the paper. Estimates for Noy and Zhang
(2023) average the gain in terms of quality and the gain in terms of time needed to complete the task. For Dell’Acqua et al. (2023) effect and SE
in % obtained by dividing the estimated figures by the control mean reported in the article. The estimate for Haslberger et al. (2023) is obtained
as a simple average of the effect on email writing, assessment and comprehension. The effect for each of these tasks are estimated as an
average of the gain in terms of quality and the gain in terms of time needed to complete each of the three tasks.
62 
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Figure A.1. Stylised conceptual view of an AI system (per OECD AI Principles)
Source: (OECD, 2019[194])
Figure A.2. The AI system lifecycle
Notes: Actors are illustrative and not exhaustive and based on previous OECD work on the AI system lifecycle.
Source: (OECD, 2022[12])
 63
THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ON PRODUCTIVITY, DISTRIBUTION AND GROWTH © OECD 2024
Figure A.3. AI Skills are Concentrated in Specific Countries
AI Skills Penetration
Notes: This chart shows the prevalence of workers with AI skills – as self-reported by LinkedIn members from 2015-2022 – by country and
against a benchmark. A country’s AI skills penetration of 1.5 means that workers in that country are 1.5X more likely to report AI skills than
workers in the benchmark. Average from 2015 to 2022 for a selection of countries with 100 000 LinkedIn members or more. The value represents
the ratio between a country’s and the benchmark’s AI skills penetrations, controlling for occupations. Data downloads provide a snapshot in
time. Caution is advised when comparing different versions of the data, as the AI-related concepts identified by the machine learning algorithm
may evolve in time. Please see methodological note for more information.
Source: LinkedIn Economic Graph, OECD AI Policy Observatory (OECD.AI).
Figure A.4. Risks from adopting AI as seen by scientists
Question: “Where do you think generative AI may have negative impacts on research?”
Source: (Van Noorden and Perkel, 2023[28]), Nature.
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Other
Raises energy consumption and carbon footprint of
research
May entrench bias or inequities into research texts
Makes it harder to assess student learning
May bring biases into literature searches
Makes it easier to fabricate or falsify research and
harder to detect
May bring mistakes or inaccuracies into research texts
(papers, code)
Makes plagiarism easier, and harder to detect
May proliferate misinformation